Historical Background:
The British came to India in 1600 as traders, in the form of East India Company, which had the exclusive right of trading in India under a charter granted by Queen Elizabeth I. In 1765, the Company, which till now had purely trading functions obtained the ‘diwani’ (i.e., rights over revenue and civil justice) of Bengal, Bihar and Orissa.1 This started its career as a territorial power. In 1858, in the wake of the ‘sepoy mutiny’, the British Crown assumed direct responsibility for the governance of India. This rule continued until India was granted independence on August 15, 1947.

With Independence came the need for a Constitution. Hence, a Constituent Assembly was formed for this purpose in 1946 and on January 26, 1950, the Constitution came into being. However, various features of the Indian Constitution and polity have their roots in the British rule. There were certain events in the British rule that laid down the legal framework for the organisation and functioning of government and administration in British India. These events have greatly influenced our constitution and polity. They are explained here in a chronological order under two major headings :
1. The Company Rule (1773 – 1858)
2. The Crown Rule (1858 – 1947)

THE COMPANY RULE (1773–1858):
Regulating Act of 1773:
This act was of great constitutional importance as (a) it was the first step taken by the British Government to control and regulate the affairs of the East India Company in India; (b) it recognised, for the first time, the political and administrative functions of the Company; and (c) it laid the foundations of central administration in India.
The features of this Act were as follows:
1. It designated the Governor of Bengal as the ‘GovernorGeneral of Bengal’ and created an Executive Council of four members to assist him. The first such GovernorGeneral was Lord Warren Hastings.
2. It made the governors of Bombay and Madras presidencies subordinate to the governor-general of Bengal, unlike earlier, when the three presidencies were independent of one another.
3. It provided for the establishment of a Supreme Court at Calcutta (1774) comprising one chief justice and three other judges.
4. It prohibited the servants of the Company from engaging in any private trade or accepting presents or bribes from the ‘natives’.
5. It strengthened the control of the British Government over the Company by requiring the Court of Directors (governing body of the Company) to report on its revenue, civil, and military affairs in India.

Amending Act of 1781:
In a bid to rectify the defects of the Regulating Act of 1773, the British Parliament passed the Amending Act of 1781, also known as the Act of Settlement. 
The features of this Act were as follows:
1. It exempted the Governor-General and the Council from the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court for the acts done by them in their official capacity. Similarly, it also exempted the servants of the company from the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court for their official actions.
2. It excluded the revenue matters and the matters arising in the collection of revenue from the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court.
3. It provided that the Supreme Court was to have jurisdiction over all the inhabitants of Culcutta. It also required the court to administer the personal law of the defendants i.e., Hindus were to be tried according to the Hindu law and Muslims were to be tried according to the Mohammedan law.
4. It laid down that the appeals from the Provincial Courts could be taken to the Governor-General-in-Council and not to the Supreme Court.
5. It empowered the Governor-General-inCouncil to frame regulations for the Provincial Courts and Councils.

Pitt’s India Act of 1784:
The next important act was the Pitt’s India Act2 of 1784.
The features of this Act were as follows:
1. It distinguished between the commercial and political functions of the Company.
2. It allowed the Court of Directors to manage the commercial affairs, but created a new body called Board of Control to manage the political affairs. Thus, it established a system of double government.
3. It empowered the Board of Control to supervise and direct all operations of the civil and military government or revenues of the British possessions in India. 
Thus, the act was significant for two reasons: first, the Company’s territories in India were for the first time called the ‘British possessions in India’; and second, the British Government was given the supreme control over Company’s affairs and its administration in India.

Act of 1786:
In 1786, Lord Cornwallis was appointed as the Governor-General of Bengal. He placed two demands to accept that post, viz., 
1. He should be given power to override the decision of his council in special cases.
2. He would also be the Commander-in-Chief.
Accordingly, the Act of 1786 was enacted to make both the provisions.

Charter Act of 1793:
The features of this Act were as follows:
1. It extended the overriding power given to Lord Cornwallis over his council, to all future Governor-Generals and Governors of Presidencies.
2. It gave the Governor-General more powers and control over the governments of the subordinate Presidencies of Bombay and Madras.
3. It extended the trade monopoly of the Company in India for another period of twenty years.
4. It provided that the Commander-in-Chief was not to be a member of the Governor-General’s council, unless he was so appointed.
5. It laid down that the members of the Board of Control and their staff were, henceforth, to be paid out of the Indian revenues.

Charter Act of 1813
The features of this Act were as follows:
1. It abolished the trade monopoly of the company in India i.e., the Indian trade was thrown open to all British merchants. However, it continued the monopoly of the company over trade in tea and trade with China.
2. It asserted the sovereignty of the British Crown over the Company’s territories in India.
3. It allowed the Christian missionaries to come to India for the purpose of enlightening the people.
4. It provided for the spread of western education among the inhabitants of the British territories in India.
5. It authorised the Local Governments in India to impose taxes on persons. They could also punish the persons for not paying taxes.

Charter Act of 1833:
This Act was the final step towards centralisation in British India.
The features of this Act were as follows:
1. It made the Governor-General of Bengal as the GovernorGeneral of India and vested in him all civil and military powers. Thus, the act created, for the first time, Government of India having authority over the entire territorial area possessed by the British in India. Lord William Bentick was the first Governor-General of India.
2. It deprived the Governor of Bombay and Madras of their
legislative powers. The Governor-General of India was given exclusive legislative powers for the entire British India. The laws made under the previous acts were called as Regulations, while laws made under this act were called as Acts.
3. It ended the activities of the East India Company as a commercial body, which became a purely administrative body. It provided that the Company’s territories in India were held by it ‘in trust for His Majesty, His heirs and successors’.
4. The Charter Act of 1833 attempted to introduce a system of open competition for selection of civil servants and stated that the Indians should not be debarred from holding any place, office and employment under the Company. However, this provision was negated after opposition from the Court of Directors.

Charter Act of 1853:
This was the last of the series of Charter Acts passed by the British Parliament between 1793 and 1853. It was a significant constitutional landmark.

The features of this Act were as follows:
1. It separated, for the first time, the legislative and executive functions of the Governor-General’s council. It provided for addition of six new members called legislative councillors to the council. In other words, it established a separate Governor-General’s legislative council which came to be known as the Indian (Central) Legislative Council. This legislative wing of the council functioned as a miniParliament, adopting the same procedures as the British Parliament. Thus, legislation, for the first time, was treated as a special function of the government, requiring special machinery and special process.
2. It introduced an open competition system of selection and recruitment of civil servants. The covenanted civil service was, thus, thrown open to the Indians also. Accordingly, the Macaulay Committee (the Committee on the Indian Civil Service) was appointed in 1854.
3. It extended the Company’s rule and allowed it to retain the possession of Indian territories on trust for the British Crown. But, it did not specify any particular period, unlike the
previous Charters. This was a clear indication that the Company’s rule could be terminated at any time the Parliament liked.
4. It introduced, for the first time, local representation in the Indian (Central) Legislative Council. Of the six new legislative members of the GovernorGeneral’s council, four members were appointed by the local (provincial) governments of Madras, Bombay, Bengal and Agra.

THE CROWN RULE (1858–1947):
Government of India Act of 1858:
This significant Act was enacted in the wake of the Revolt of 1857–also known as the First War of Independence or the ‘sepoy mutiny’. The act known as the Act for the Good Government of India, abolished the East India Company, and transferred the powers of Government, territories and revenues to the British Crown.
The features of this Act were as follows:
1. It provided that India, henceforth, was to be governed by, and in the name of, Her Majesty. It changed the designation of the Governor-General of India to that of Viceroy of India. He (Viceroy) was the direct representative of the British Crown in India. Lord Canning, thus, became the first Viceroy of India.
2. It ended the system of double Government by abolishing the Board of Control and Court of Directors. 
3. It created a new office, Secretary of State for India, vested with complete authority and control over Indian administration. The secretary of state was a member of the British Cabinet and was responsible ultimately to the British Parliament.
4. It established a 15-member council of India to assist the Secretary of State for India. The council was an advisory body. The secretary of state was made the Chairman of the council.
5. It constituted the Secretary of State-inCouncil as a body corporate, capable of suing and being sued in India and in England.
‘The Act of 1858 was, however, largely confined to the improvement of the administrative machinery by which the Indian Government was to be supervised and controlled in England. It did not alter in any substantial way the system of Government that prevailed in India .’

Indian Councils Act of 1861:
After the great revolt of 1857, the British Government felt the necessity of seeking the cooperation of the Indians in the administration of their country. In pursuance of this policy of association, three acts were enacted by the British Parliament in 1861, 1892 and 1909. The Indian Councils Act of 1861 is an important landmark in the constitutional and political history of India.
The features of this Act were as follows:
1. It made a beginning of the representative institutions by associating Indians with the law-making process. It, thus, provided that the Viceroy should nominate some Indians as non-official members of his expanded council. In 1862, Lord Canning, the then Viceroy, nominated three Indians to his legislative council–the Raja of Benaras, the Maharaja of Patiala and Sir Dinkar Rao. 
2. It initiated the process of decentralisation by restoring the legislative powers to the Bombay and Madras Presidencies. It, thus, reversed the centralising tendency that started from the Regulating Act of 1773 and reached its climax under the Charter Act of 1833. This policy of legislative devolution resulted in the grant of almost complete internal autonomy to the provinces in 1937.
3. It also provided for the establishment of new legislative councils for Bengal, North-Western Provinces and Punjab, which were established in 1862, 1886 and 1897, respectively.
4. It empowered the Viceroy to make rules and orders for the more convenient transaction of business in the council. It also gave a recognition to the ‘portfolio’ system, introduced by Lord Canning in 1859. Under this, a member of the Viceroy’s council was made in-charge of one or more departments of the Government and was authorised to issue final orders on behalf of the council on matters of his department(s).
5. It empowered the Viceroy to issue ordinances, without the concurrence of the legislative council, during an emergency.
The life of such an ordinance was six months.

Indian Councils Act of 1892:
The features of this Act were as follows:
1. It increased the number of additional (non-official) members in the Central and provincial legislative councils, but maintained the official majority in them.
2. It increased the functions of legislative councils and gave them the power of discussing the budget5 and addressing questions to the executive.
3. It provided for the nomination of some non-official members of the (a) Central Legislative Council by the viceroy on the recommendation of the provincial legislative councils and the Bengal Chamber of Commerce, and (b) that of the provincial legislative councils by the Governors on the recommendation of the district boards, municipalities, universities, trade associations, zamin-dars and chambers.
‘The act made a limited and indirect provision for the use of election in filling up some of the non-official seats both in the Central and provincial legislative councils. The word “election” was, however, not used in the Act. The process was described as nomination made on the recommendation of certain bodies.’

Indian Councils Act of 1909:
This Act is also known as Morley-Minto Reforms (Lord Morley was the then Secretary of State for India and Lord Minto was the then Viceroy of India).
The features of this Act were as follows:
1. It considerably increased the size of the legislative councils, both Central and provincial. The number of members in the Central legislative council was raised from 16 to 60. The number of members in the provincial legislative councils was not uniform.
2. It retained official majority in the Central legislative council, but allowed the provincial legislative councils to have nonofficial majority.
3. It enlarged the deliberative functions of the legislative councils at both the levels. For example, members were allowed to ask supplementary questions, move resolutions on the budget and so on.
4. It provided (for the first time) for the association of Indians with the executive councils of the Viceroy and Governors. Satyendra Prasad Sinha became the first Indian to join the Viceroy’s executive council. He was appointed as the Law Member.
5. It introduced a system of communal representation for Muslims by accepting the concept of ‘separate electorate’. Under this, the Muslim members were to be elected only by Muslim voters. Thus, the Act ‘legalised communalism’ and Lord Minto came to be known as the Father of Communal Electorate.
6. It also provided for the separate representation of presidency corporations, chambers of commerce, universities and zamindars. 

Government of India Act of 1919:
On August 20, 1917, the British Government declared, for the first time, that its objective was the gradual introduction of responsible Government in India. The Government of India Act of 1919 was thus enacted, which came into force in 1921. This Act is also known as MontaguChelmsford Reforms (Montagu was the Secretary of State for India and Lord Chelmsford was the Viceroy of India).
The features of this Act were as follows:
1. It relaxed the central control over the provinces by demarcating and separating the central and provincial subjects. The central and provincial legislatures were authorised to make laws on their respective list of subjects. However, the structure of government continued to be centralised and unitary.
2. It further divided the provincial subjects into two parts–transferred and reserved. The transferred subjects were to be administered by the Governor with the aid of Ministers responsible to the legislative council. The reserved subjects, on the other hand, were to be administered by the Governor and his executive council without being responsible to the legislative council. This dual scheme of governance was
known as ‘dyarchy’–a term derived from the Greek word diarche which means double rule. However, this experiment was largely unsuccessful.
3. It introduced, for the first time, bicameralism and direct elections in the country. Thus, the Indian legislative council was replaced by a bicameral legislature consisting of an Upper House (Council of State) and a Lower House (Legislative Assembly). The majority of members of both the Houses were chosen by direct election.
4. It required that the three of the six members of the Viceroy’s executive Council (other than the Commander-in-Chief) were to be Indian.
5. It extended the principle of communal representation by providing separate electorates for Sikhs, Indian Christians, Anglo-Indians and Europeans.
6. It granted franchise to a limited number of people on the basis of property, tax or education. 
7. It created a new office of the High Commissioner for India in London and transferred to him some of the functions hitherto performed by the Secretary of State for India.
8. It provided for the establishment of a public service commission. Hence, a Central Public Service Commission was set up in 1926 for recruiting civil servants8 .
9. It separated, for the first time, provincial budgets from the Central budget and authorised the provincial legislatures to enact their budgets.
10. It provided for the appointment of a statutory commission to inquire into and report on its working after ten years of its coming into force. 

Simon Commission:
In November 1927 itself (i.e., 2 years before the schedule), the British Government announced the appointment a seven-member statutory commission under the chairmanship of Sir John Simon to report on the condition of India under its new Constitution. All the members of the commission were British and hence, all the parties boycotted the commission. The commission submitted its report in 1930 and recommended the abolition of dyarchy, extension of responsible Government in the provinces, establishment of a federation of British India and princely states, continuation of communal electorate and so on. To consider the proposals of the commission, the British Government convened three round table conferences of the representatives of the British Government, British India and Indian princely states. On the basis of these discussions, a ‘White Paper on Consitutional Reforms’ was prepared and submitted for the consideration of the Joint Select Committee of the British Parliament. The recommendations
of this committee were incorporated (with certain changes) in the next Government of India Act of 1935. 

Communal Award:
In August 1932, Ramsay MacDonald, the British Prime Minister, announced a scheme of representation of the minorities, which came to be known as the Communal Award. The award not only continued separate electorates for the Muslims, Sikhs, Indian Christians, Anglo-Indians and Europeans but also extended it to the depressed classes (Scheduled Castes). Gandhiji was distressed over this extension of the principle of communal representation to the depressed classes and undertook fast unto death in Yerawada Jail (Poona) to get the award modified. At last, there was an agreement between the leaders of the Congress and the depressed classes. The agreement, known as Poona Pact, retained the Hindu joint electorate and gave reserved seats to the depressed classes.

Government of India Act of 1935:
The Act marked a second milestone towards a completely responsible government in India. It was a lengthy and detailed document having 321 Sections and 10 Schedules. The features of this Act were as follows:
1. It provided for the establishment of an All-India Federation consisting of provinces and princely states as units. The Act divided the powers between the Centre and units in terms of three lists–Federal List (for Centre, with 59 items), Provincial List (for provinces, with 54 items) and the Concurrent List (for both, with 36 items). Residuary powers were given to the Viceroy. However, the federation never came into being as the princely states did not join it.
2. It abolished dyarchy in the provinces and introduced ‘provincial autonomy’ in its place. The provinces were  allowed to act as autonomous units of administration in their defined spheres. Moreover, the Act introduced responsible Governments in provinces, that is, the Governor was required to act with the advice of ministers responsible to the provincial legislature. This came into effect in 1937 and was discontinued in 1939.
3. It provided for the adoption of dyarchy at the Centre. Consequently, the federal subjects were divided into reserved subjects and transferred subjects. However, this provision of the Act did not come into operation at all. 
4. It introduced bicameralism in six out of eleven provinces. Thus, the legislatures of Bengal, Bombay, Madras, Bihar, Assam and the United Provinces were made bicameral consisting of a legislative council (upper house) and a legislative assembly (lower house). However, many restrictions were placed on them.
5. It further extended the principle of communal representation by providing separate electorates for depressed classes (Scheduled Castes), women and labour (workers). 
6. It abolished the Council of India, established by the Government of India Act of 1858. The secretary of state for India was provided with a team of advisors.
7. It extended franchise. About 10 per cent of the total population got the voting right.
8. It provided for the establishment of a Reserve Bank of India to control the currency and credit of the country.
9. It provided for the establishment of not only a Federal Public Service Commission, but also a Provincial Public Service Commission and Joint Public Service Commission for two or
more provinces.
10. It provided for the establishment of a Federal Court, which was set up in 1937.

Indian Independence Act of 1947:
On February 20, 1947, the British Prime Minister Clement Atlee declared that the British rule in India would end by June 30,1948; after which the power would be transferred to responsible Indian hands. This announcement was followed by the agitation by the Muslim League demanding partition of the country. Again on June 3, 1947, the British Government made it clear that any Constitution framed by the Constituent Assembly of India (formed in 1946) cannot apply to those parts of the country which were unwilling to accept it. On the same day (June 3, 1947), Lord Mountbatten, the Viceroy of India, put forth the partition plan, known as the Mountbatten Plan. The plan was accepted by the Congress and the Muslim League. Immediate effect was given to the plan by enacting the Indian Independence Act9 (1947).

The features of this Act were as follows:
1. It ended the British rule in India and declared India as an independent and sovereign state from August 15, 1947. 
2. It provided for the partition of India and creation of two independent dominions of India and Pakistan with the right to secede from the British Commonwealth.
3. It abolished the office of Viceroy and provided, for each dominion, a governorgeneral, who was to be appointed by the British King on the advice of the dominion cabinet. His Majesty’s Government in Britain was to have no responsibility with respect to the Government of India or Pakistan.
4. It empowered the Constituent Assemblies of the two dominions to frame and adopt any constitution for their respective nations and to repeal any act of the British Parliament, including the Independence act itself.
5. It empowered the Constituent Assemblies of both the dominions to legislate for their respective territories till the new constitutions were drafted and enforced. No Act of the British Parliament passed after August 15, 1947 was to extend to either of the new dominions unless it was extended thereto by a law of the legislature of the dominion. 
6. It abolished the office of the Secretary of State for India and transferred his functions to the Secretary of State for Commonwealth Affairs.
7. It proclaimed the lapse of British paramountcy over the Indian princely states and treaty relations with tribal areas from August 15, 1947.
8. It granted freedom to the Indian princely states either to join the Dominion of India or Dominion of Pakistan or to remain independent.
9. It provided for the governance of each of the dominions and the provinces by the Government of India Act of 1935, till the new Constitutions were framed. The dominions were however authorised to make modifications in the Act. 
10. It deprived the British Monarch of his right to veto bills or ask for reservation of certain bills for his approval. But, this right was reserved for the GovernorGeneral. The GovernorGeneral would have full power to assent to any bill in the name of His Majesty.
11. It designated the Governor-General of India and the provincial governors as constitutional (nominal) heads of the states. They were made to act on the advice of the respective council of ministers in all matters.
12. It dropped the title of Emperor of India from the royal titles of the King of England.
13. It discontinued the appointment to civil services and reservation of posts by the secretary of state for India. The members of the civil services appointed before August 15, 1947 would continue to enjoy all benefits that they were entitled to till that time. At the stroke of midnight of 14-15 August, 1947, the British rule came to an end and power was transferred to the two new independent Dominions of India and Pakistan. Lord Mountbatten became the first GovernorGeneral of the new Dominion of India. He swore in Jawaharlal Nehru as the first Prime Minister of independent India. The Constituent Assembly of India formed in 1946 became the Parliament of the Indian Dominion.

Interim Government (1946):
1. Jawaharlal Nehru: Vice-President of the Council; External Affairs & Commonwealth Relations
2. Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel: Home, Information & Broadcasting
3. Dr. Rajendra Prasad: Food & Agriculture
4. Dr. John Mathai: Industries & Supplies
5. Jagjivan Ram: Labour
6. Sardar Baldev Singh: Defence
7. C.H. Bhabha: Works, Mines & Power
8. Liaquat Ali Khan: Finance
9. Abdur Rab Nishtar: Posts & Air
10. Asaf Ali: Railways & Transport
11. C. Rajagopalachari: Education & Arts
12. I.I. Chundrigar: Commerce
13. Ghaznafar Ali Khan: Health
14. Joginder Nath Mandal: Law

Note: The members of the interim Government were members of the Viceroy’s Executive Council. The Viceroy continued to be the head of the Council. But, Jawaharlal Nehru was designated as the Vice-President of the Council.

First Cabinet of Free India (1947):
1. Jawaharlal Nehru: Prime Minister; External Affairs & Commonwealth Relations; Scientific Research
2. Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel: Home, Information & Broadcasting; States
3. Dr. Rajendra Prasad: Food & Agriculture
4. Maulana Abul Kalam Azad: Education
5. Dr. John Mathai: Railways & Transport
6. R.K. Shanmugham Chetty: Finance
7. Dr. B.R. Ambedkar: Law
8. Jagjivan Ram: Labour
9. Sardar Baldev Singh: Defence
10. Raj Kumari Amrit Kaur: Health
11. C.H. Bhabha: Commerce
12. Rafi Ahmed Kidwai: Communication
13. Dr. Shayama Prasad Mukherji: Industries & Supplies
14. V.N. Gadgil: Works, Mines & Power

Making of the Constitution:

DEMAND FOR A CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY:
It was in 1934 that the idea of a Constituent Assembly for India was put forward for the first time by M.N. Roy, a pioneer of communist movement in India. In 1935, the Indian National Congress (INC), for the first time, officially demanded a Constituent Assembly to frame the Constitution of India. In 1938, Jawaharlal Nehru, on behalf the INC declared that ‘the Constitution of free India must be framed, without outside interference, by a Constituent Assembly elected on the basis of adult franchise’.
The demand was finally accepted in principle by the British Government in what is known as the ‘August Offer’ of 1940. In 1942, Sir Stafford Cripps, a Member of the Cabinet, came to India with a draft proposal of the British Government on the framing of an independent Constitution to be adopted after the World War II. The Cripps Proposals were rejected by the Muslim League, which wanted India to be divided into two autonomous states with two separate Constituent Assemblies. Finally, a Cabinet Mission was sent to India. While it rejected the idea of two Constituent Assemblies, it put forth a scheme for the Constituent Assembly which more or less satisfied the Muslim League.

COMPOSITION OF THE CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY: 
The Constituent Assembly was constituted in November 1946 under the scheme formulated by the Cabinet Mission Plan. The features of the scheme were:
1. The total strength of the Constituent Assembly was to be 389. Of these, 296 seats were to be allotted to British India and 93 seats to the princely states. Out of 296 seats allotted to the British India, 292 members were to be drawn from the eleven governors’ provinces2 and four from the four Chief Commissioners’ provinces3 , one from each.
2. Each province and princely state (or group of states in case of small states) were to be allotted seats in proportion to their respective population. Roughly, one seat was to be allotted for every million population.
3. Seats allocated to each British province were to be divided among the three principal communities–Muslims, Sikhs and General (all except Muslims and Sikhs), in proportion to their population.
4. The representatives of each community were to be elected by members of that community in the provincial legislative assembly and voting was to be by the method of proportional representation by means of single transferable vote.
5. The representatives of the princely states were to be nominated by the heads of the princely states. It is, thus, clear that the Constituent Assembly was to be a partly elected and partly nominated body. Moreover, the members were to be indirectly elected by the members of the provincial assemblies, who themselves were elected on a limited franchise. 
The elections to the Constituent Assembly (for 296 seats allotted to the British Indian Provinces) were held in July-August 1946. The Indian National Congress won 208 seats, the Muslim League 73 seats and the small groups and independents got the remaining 15 seats. However, the 93 seats allotted to the princely states were not filled as they decided to stay away from the Constituent Assembly.
Although the Constituent Assembly was not directly elected by the people of India on the basis of adult franchise, the Assembly comprised representatives of all sections of the Indian society–Hindus, Muslims, Sikhs, Parsis, Anglo-Indians, Indian Christians, SCs, STs including women of all these sections. The Assembly included all important personalities of India at that time, with the exception of Mahatma Gandhi.

WORKING OF THE CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY:
The Constituent Assembly held its first meeting on December 9, 1946. The Muslim League boycotted the meeting and insisted on a separate state of Pakistan. The meeting was, thus, attended by only 211 members. Dr. Sachchidananda Sinha, the oldest member, was elected as the temporary President of the Assembly, following the French practice. Later, Dr. Rajendra Prasad was elected as the President of the Assembly. Similarly, both H.C. Mukherjee and V.T. Krishnamachari were elected as the Vice-Presidents of the Assembly. In other words, the Assembly had two Vice-Presidents.

Objectives Resolution:
On December 13, 1946, Jawaharlal Nehru moved the historic ‘Objectives Resolution’ in the Assembly. It laid down the fundamentals and philosophy of the constitutional structure. It read:
1. “This Constituent Assembly declares its firm and solemn resolve to proclaim India as an Independent Sovereign Republic and to draw up for her future governance a Constitution:
2. Wherein the territories that now comprise British India, the territories that now form the Indian States and such other parts of India as are outside India and the States as well as other territories as are willing to be constituted into the independent sovereign India, shall be a Union of them all; and
3. wherein the said territories, whether with their present boundaries or with such others as may be determined by the Constituent Assembly and thereafter according to the law of the Constitution, shall possess and retain the status of autonomous units together with residuary powers and exercise all powers and functions of Government and administration save and except such powers and functions
as are vested in or assigned to the Union or as are inherent or implied in the Union or resulting therefrom; and
4. wherein all power and authority of the sovereign independent India, its constituent parts and organs of Government are derived from the people; and 
5. wherein shall be guaranteed and secured to all the people of India justice, social, economic and political; equality of status of opportunity, and before the law; freedom of thought, expression, belief, faith, worship, vocation, association and action, subject to law and public morality; and
6. wherein adequate safeguards shall be provided for minorities, backward and tribal areas, and depressed and other backward classes; and
7. whereby shall be maintained the integrity of the territory of the Republic and its sovereign rights on land, sea and air according to justice and the law of civilized nations; and
8. This ancient land attains its rightful and honoured place in the world and makes its full and willing contribution to the promotion of world peace and the welfare of mankind.”
This Resolution was unanimously adopted by the Assembly on January 22, 1947. It influenced the eventual shaping of the constitution through all its subsequent stages. Its modified version forms the Preamble of the present Constitution.

Changes by the Independence Act:
The representatives of the princely states, who had stayed away from the Constituent Assembly, gradually joined it. On April 28, 1947, representatives of the six states5 were part of the Assembly. After the acceptance of the Mountbatten Plan of June 3, 1947, for the partition of the country, the representatives of most of the other princely states took their seats in the Assembly. The
members of the Muslim League from the Indian Dominion also entered the Assembly. The Indian Independence Act of 1947 made the following three changes in the position of the Assembly:
1. The Assembly was made a fully sovereign body, which could frame any Constitution it pleased. The act empowered the Assembly to abrogate or alter any law made by the British Parliament in relation to India.
2. The Assembly also became a legislative body. In other words, two separate functions were assigned to the Assembly, that is, making of the Constitution for free India and enacting of ordinary laws for the country. These two tasks were to be performed on separate days. Thus, the Assembly became the first Parliament of free India (Dominion Legislature). Whenever the Assembly met as the Constituent body it was chaired by Dr. Rajendra Prasad and when it met as the legislative body6 , it was chaired by G.V. Mavlankar. These two functions continued till November 26, 1949, when the task of making the Constitution was over.
3. The Muslim League members (hailing from the areas included in the Pakistan) withdrew from the Constituent Assembly for India. Consequently, the total strength of the Assembly came down to 299 as against 389 originally fixed in 1946 under the Cabinet Mission Plan. The strength of the Indian provinces (formerly British Provinces) was reduced from 296 to 229 and those of the princely states from 93 to 70.

Other Functions Performed:
In addition to the making of the Constitution and enacting of ordinary laws, the Constituent Assembly also performed the following functions:
1. It ratified the India’s membership of the Commonwealth in May 1949.
2. It adopted the national flag on July 22, 1947.
3. It adopted the national anthem on January 24, 1950.
4. It adopted the national song on January 24, 1950.
5. It elected Dr. Rajendra Prasad as the first President of India on January 24, 1950.
In all, the Constituent Assembly had 11 sessions over two years, 11 months and 18 days. The Constitution-makers had gone through the Constitutions of about 60 countries, and the Draft Constitution was considered for 114 days. The total expenditure incurred on making the Constitution amounted to Rs. 64 lakh.

On January 24, 1950, the Constituent Assembly held its final session. It, however, did not end, and continued as the provisional parliament of India from January 26, 1950, till the formation of new Parliament after the first general elections in 1951–52.

COMMITTEES OF THE CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY:
The Constituent Assembly appointed a number of committees to deal with different tasks of constitution-making. Out of these, eight were major committees and the others were minor committees. The names of these committees and their Chairman are given below:

Major Committees:
1. Union Powers Committee - Jawaharlal Nehru
2. Union Constitution Committee -Jawaharlal Nehru
3. Provincial Constitution Committee -Sardar Patel
4. Drafting Committee - Dr. B.R. Ambedkar
5. Advisory Committee on Fundamental Rights, Minorities and
Tribal and Excluded Areas - Sardar Patel. This committee had the following five sub-committees:
(a) Fundamental Rights Sub-Committee - J.B. Kripalani
(b) Minorities Sub-Committee - H.C. Mukherjee
(c) North-East Frontier Tribal Areas and Assam Excluded and Partially Excluded Areas Sub-Committee -Gopinath Bardoloi
(d) Excluded and Partially Excluded Areas (other than those in Assam) Sub-Committee - A.V. Thakkar
(e) North-West Frontier Tribal Areas Sub-Committee8a
6. Rules of Procedure Committee - Dr. Rajendra Prasad
7. States Committee (Committee for Negotiating with States) Jawaharlal Nehru
8. Steering Committee - Dr. Rajendra Prasad

Minor Committees:
1. Finance and Staff Committee - Dr. Rajendra Prasad
2. Credentials Committee - Alladi Krishnaswami Ayyar
3. House Committee - B. Pattabhi Sitaramayya
4. Order of Business Committee - Dr. K.M. Munshi
5. Ad-hoc Committee on the National Flag - Dr. Rajendra Prasad
6. Committee on the Functions of the Constituent Assembly G.V. Mavalankar
7. Ad-hoc Committee on the Supreme Court - S. Varadachari (Not an Assembly Member)
8. Committee on Chief Commissioners’ Provinces - B. Pattabhi Sitaramayya
9. Expert Committee on the Financial Provisions of the Union Constitution -Nalini Ranjan Sarkar (Not an Assembly Member)
10. Linguistic Provinces Commission - S.K. Dar (Not an Assembly Member)
11. Special Committee to Examine the Draft Constitution Jawaharlal Nehru
12. Press Gallery Committee - Usha Nath Sen
13. Ad-hoc Committee on Citizenship - S. Varadachari (Not an Assembly Member)

Drafting Committee:
Among all the committees of the Constituent Assembly, the most important committee was the Drafting Committee set up on August 29, 1947. It was this committee that was entrusted with the task of preparing a draft of the new Constitution. It consisted of seven members. They were:
1. Dr. B.R. Ambedkar (Chairman)
2. N. Gopalaswamy Ayyangar
3. Alladi Krishnaswamy Ayyar
4. Dr. K.M. Munshi
5. Syed Mohammad Saadullah
6. N. Madhava Rau (He replaced B.L. Mitter who resigned due to ill-health)
7. T.T. Krishnamachari (He replaced D.P. Khaitan who died in 1948)
The Drafting Committee, after taking into consideration the proposals of the various committees, prepared the first draft of the Constitution of India, which was published in February, 1948. The people of India were given eight months to discuss the draft and propose amendments. In the light of the public comments, criticisms and suggestions, the Drafting Committee prepared a second draft, which was published in October, 1948. The Drafting Committee took less than six months to prepare its draft. In all it sat only for 141 days.

ENACTMENT OF THE CONSTITUTION:
Dr. B.R. Ambedkar introduced the final draft of the Constitution in the Assembly on November 4, 1948 (first reading). The Assembly had a general discussion on it for five days (till November 9, 1948). The second reading (clause by clause consideration) started on November 15, 1948, and ended on October 17, 1949. During this stage, as many as 7653 amendments were proposed and 2473 were actually discussed in the Assembly. The third reading of the draft started on November 14, 1949. Dr. B.R. Ambedkar moved a motion–‘the Constitution as settled by the Assembly be passed’. The motion on Draft Constitution was declared as passed on November 26, 1949, and received the signatures of the members and the president. Out of a total 299 members of the Assembly, only 284 were actually present on that day and signed the Constitution. This is also the date mentioned in the Preamble as the date on which the people of India in the Constituent Assembly adopted, enacted and gave to themselves this Constitution.

The Constitution as adopted on November 26, 1949, contained a Preamble, 395 Articles and 8 Schedules. The Preamble was enacted after the entire Constitution was already enacted. Dr. B.R. Ambedkar, the then Law Minister, piloted the Draft Constitution in the Assembly. He took a very prominent part in the deliberations of the Assembly. He was known for his logical, forceful and persuasive arguments on the floor of the Assembly. He is recognised as the ‘Father of the Constitution of India’. This brilliant writer, constitutional expert, undisputed leader of the Scheduled Castes and the ‘chief architect of the Constitution of India’ is also known as a ‘Modern Manu’.

ENFORCEMENT OF THE CONSTITUTION:
Some provisions of the Constitution pertaining to citizenship, elections, provisional parliament, temporary and transitional provisions, and short title contained in Articles 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 60, 324, 366, 367, 379, 380, 388, 391, 392 and 393 came into force on November 26, 1949, itself. The remaining provisions (the major part) of the Constitution came into force on January 26, 1950. This day is referred to in the Constitution as the ‘date of its commencement’, and celebrated as the Republic Day.

January 26 was specifically chosen as the ‘date of commencement’ of the Constitution because of its historical importance. It was on this day in 1930 that Purna Swaraj day was celebrated, following the resolution of the Lahore Session (December 1929) of the INC. With the commencement of the Constitution, the Indian Independence Act of 1947 and the Government of India Act of 1935, with all enactments amending or supplementing the latter Act, were repealed. The Abolition of Privy Council Jurisdiction Act (1949) was however continued.

EXPERTS COMMITTEE OF THE CONGRESS:
While elections to the Constituent Assembly were still in progress, on July 8, 1946, the Congress Party (Indian National Congress) appointed an Experts Committee for the purpose of preparing material for the Constituent Assembly. This committee consisted of the following members8: 
1. Jawaharlal Nehru (Chairman)
2. M. Asaf Ali
3. K.M. Munshi
4. N. Gopalaswami Ayyangar
5. K.T. Shah
6. D.R. Gadgil
7. Humayun Kabir
8. K. Santhanam

Later, on the Chairman’s proposal, it was resolved that Krishna Kripalani be co-opted as member and convener of the committee. The committee had two sittings, the first at New Delhi from July 20 to 22, 1946, and the second at Bombay from August 15 to 17, 1946. Apart from a number of notes prepared by its members, the committee discussed the procedure to be adopted by the Constituent Assembly, the question of the appointment of various committees and the draft of a resolution on the objectives of the constitution to be moved during the first session of the Constituent Assembly.

On the role played by this committee in the making of the Constitution, Granville Austin, a British constitutional expert, observed: “It was the Congress Experts Committee that set India on the road to her present Constitution. The committee members, working within the framework of the Cabinet Mission Scheme, made general suggestions about autonomous areas, the powers of provincial Governments and the Centre, and about such issues as the princely states and the amending power. They also drafted a resolution, closely resembling the Objectives Resolution”.

CRITICISM OF THE CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY:
The critics have criticised the Constituent Assembly on various grounds. These are as follows: 
1. Not a Representative Body: The critics have argued that the Constituent Assembly was not a representative body as its members were not directly elected by the people of India on the basis of universal adult franchise.
2. Not a Sovereign Body: The critics maintained that the Constituent Assembly was not a sovereign body as it was created by the proposals of the British Government. Further, they said that the Assembly held its sessions with the permission of the British Government.
3. Time Consuming: According to the critics, the Constituent Assembly took unduly long time to make the Constitution. They stated that the framers of the American Constitution took only four months to complete their work. In this context, Naziruddin Ahmed, a member of the Constituent Assembly, coined a new name for the Drafting Committee to show his contempt for it. He called it a “Drifting Committee”.
4. Dominated by Congress: The critics charged that the Constituent Assembly was dominated by the Congress party. Granville Austin, an American Constitutional expert, remarked: ‘The Constituent Assembly was a one-party body in an essentially one-party country. The Assembly was the Congress and the Congress was India’. 
5. Lawyer-Politician Domination: It is also maintained by the critics that the Constituent Assembly was dominated by lawyers and politicians. They pointed out that other sections of the society were not sufficiently represented. This, to them, is the main reason for the bulkiness and complicated language of the Constitution.
6. Dominated by Hindus: According to some critics, the Constituent Assembly was a Hindu dominated body. Lord Viscount Simon called it ‘a body of Hindus’. Similarly, Winston Churchill commented that the Constituent Assembly represented ‘only one major community in India’.

IMPORTANT FACTS:
1. Elephant was adopted as the symbol (seal) of the Constituent Assembly.
2. Sir B.N. Rau was appointed as the constitutional advisor (Legal advisor) to the Constituent Assembly.
3. H.V.R. Iyengar was the Secretary to the Constituent Assembly.
4. S.N. Mukerjee was the chief draftsman of the constitution in the Constituent Assembly.
5. Prem Behari Narain Raizada was the calligrapher of the Indian Constitution. The original constitution was handwritten by him in a flowing italic style.
6. The original version was beautified and decorated by artists from Shantiniketan including Nand Lal Bose and Beohar Rammanohar Sinha.
7. Beohar Rammanohar Sinha illuminated, beautified and ornamented the original Preamble calligraphed by Prem Behari Narain Raizada.
8. The calligraphy of the Hindi version of the original constitution was done by Vasant Krishan Vaidya and elegantly decorated and illuminated by Nand Lal Bose.

HINDI TEXT OF THE CONSTITUTION:
Originally, the Constitution of India did not make any provision with respect to an authoritative text of the Constitution in the Hindi language. Later, a provision in this regard was made by the 58th Constitutional Amendment Act of 19878f. This amendment inserted a new Article 394-A in the last part of the Constitution i.e., Part XXII. This article contains the following provisions:
1. The President shall cause to be published under his authority:
(i) The translation of the Constitution in Hindi language. The modifications which are necessary to bring it in conformity with the language, style and terminology adopted in the authoritative texts of the Central Acts in Hindi can be made in it. All the amendments of the Constitution made before such publication should be incorporated in it.
(ii) The translation in Hindi of every amendment of the constitution made in English.
2. The translation of the Constitution and its every amendment  published shall be construed to have the same meaning as the original text in English. If any difficulty arises in this matter, the President shall cause the Hindi text to be revised suitably.
3. The translation of the Constitution and its every amendment published shall be deemed to be, for all purposes, its authoritative text in Hindi.

Allocation of seats in the Constituent Assembly of India (1946):
1. British Indian Provinces (11) :292
2. Princely States (Indian States): 93
3. Chief Commissioners’ Provinces (4) : 4
Total: 389

Sessions of the Constituent Assembly at a Glance:
First Session: December 9–23, 1946
Second Session: January 20–25, 1947
Third Session: April 28-May 2, 1947
Fourth Session: July 14–31, 1947
Fifth Session: August 14–30, 1947
Sixth Session: January 27, 1948
Seventh Session: November 4, 1948-January 8, 1949
Eighth Session: May 16-June 16, 1949
Ninth Session: July 30-September 18, 1949
Tenth Session: October 6–17, 1949
Eleventh Session: November 14–26, 1949
Note: The Assembly met once again on January 24, 1950, when the members appended their signatures to the Constitution of India.

Salient Features of the Constitution:
The Indian Constitution is unique in its contents and spirit. Though borrowed from almost every Constitution of the world, the Constitution of India has several salient features that distinguish it from the Constitutions of the other countries. It should be noted at the outset that a number of original features of the Constitution (as adopted in 1949) have undergone a substantial change, on account of several amendments, particularly 7th, 42nd, 44th, 73rd, 74th, 97th and 101st Amendments. In fact, the 42nd Amendment Act (1976) is known as ‘Mini-Constitution’ due to the important and large number of changes made by it in various parts of the Constitution. However, in the Kesavananda Bharati case (1973), the Supreme Court ruled that the constituent power of Parliament under Article 368 does not enable it to alter the ‘basic structure’ of the Constitution.

SALIENT FEATURES OF THE CONSTITUTION:
The salient features of the Constitution, as it stands today, are as follows:
1. Lengthiest Written Constitution:
Constitutions are classified into written, like the American Constitution, or unwritten, like the British Constitution. The Constitution of India is the lengthiest of all the written Constitutions of the world. It is a very comprehensive, elaborate and detailed document. Originally (1949), the Constitution contained a Preamble, 395 Articles (divided into 22 Parts) and 8 Schedules. Presently, it consists of a Preamble, about 448 Articles (divided into 25 Parts) and 12 Schedules. 
The various amendments carried out since 1951 have deleted about 20 Articles and one Part (VII) and added about 95 Articles, four Parts (IVA, IXA, IXB and XIVA) and four Schedules (9, 10, 11 and 12). No other Constitution in the world has so many Articles and Schedules.
Four factors have contributed to the elephantine size of our Constitution. They are:
(a) Geographical factors, that is, the vastness of the country and its diversity.
(b) Historical factors, e.g., the influence of the Government of India Act of 1935, which was bulky.
(c) Single Constitution for both the Centre and the states.
(d) Dominance of legal luminaries in the Constituent Assembly. The Constitution contains not only the fundamental principles of governance, but also detailed administrative provisions. Further, those matters which in other modern democratic countries have been left to the ordinary legislation or established political conventions have also been included in the constitutional document itself in India.

2. Drawn From Various Sources:
The Constitution of India has borrowed most of its provisions from the Constitutions of various other countries as well as from the Government of India Act5 of 1935. Dr. B.R. Ambedkar proudly acclaimed that the Constitution of India has been framed after ‘ransacking all the known Constitutions of the World’. The structural part of the Constitution is, to a large extent, derived from the Government of India Act of 1935. The philosophical part of the Constitution (the Fundamental Rights and the Directive Principles of State Policy) derive their inspiration from the American and Irish Constitutions, respectively. The
political part of the Constitution (the principle of Cabinet Government and the relations between the Executive and the Legislature) have been largely drawn from the British Constitution.
The other provisions of the Constitution have been drawn from the Constitutions of Canada, Australia, Germany, USSR (now Russia), France, South Africa, Japan and so on. The most profound influence and material source of the Constitution is the Government of India Act, 1935. The Federal Scheme, Judiciary, Governors, Emergency Powers, the Public Service Commissions and most of the administrative details are drawn from this Act. More than half of the provisions of Constitution are identical to or bear a close resemblance to the Act of 1935.

3. Blend of Rigidity and Flexibility:
Constitutions are also classified into rigid and flexible. A rigid Constitution is one that requires a special procedure for its amendment, as for example, the American Constitution. A flexible constitution, on the other hand, is one that can be amended in the same manner as the ordinary laws are made, as for example, the British Constitution. The Constitution of India is neither rigid nor flexible, but a synthesis of both. Article 368 provides for two types of amendments:
(a) Some provisions can be amended by a special majority of the Parliament, i.e., a two-third majority of the members of each House present and voting, and a majority of the total membership of each House.
(b) Some other provisions can be amended by a special majority of the Parliament and with the ratification by half of the total states. At the same time, some provisions of the Constitution can be amended by a simple majority of the Parliament in the manner of ordinary legislative process. Notably, these amendments do not come under Article 368.

4. Federal System with Unitary Bias:
The Constitution of India establishes a federal system of Government. It contains all the usual features of a federation, viz., two Government, division of powers, written Constitution, supremacy of Constitution, rigidity of Constitution, independent judiciary and bicameralism. However, the Indian Constitution also contains a large number of unitary or non-federal features, viz., a strong Centre, single Constitution, single citizenship, flexibility of Constitution, integrated judiciary, appointment of state governor by the Centre, all-India services, emergency provisions and so on. 
Moreover, the term ‘Federation’ has nowhere been used in the Constitution. Article 1, on the other hand, describes India as a ‘Union of States’ which implies two things: one, Indian Federation is not the result of an agreement by the states; and two, no state has the right to secede from the federation. Hence, the Indian Constitution has been variously described as ‘federal in form but, unitary in spirit’, ‘quasi-federal’ by K.C. Wheare, ‘bargaining federalism’ by Morris Jones, ‘co-operative federalism’ by Granville Austin, ‘federation with a centralising tendency’ by Ivor Jennings and so on.

5. Parliamentary Form of Government:
The Constitution of India has opted for the British Parliamentary System of Government rather than American Presidential System of Government. The parliamentary system is based on the principle of co-operation and co-ordination between the legislative and executive organs while the presidential system is based on the doctrine of separation of powers between the two organs. The parliamentary system is also known as the ‘Westminster’10 Model of Government, responsible Government and Cabinet Government. The Constitution establishes the parliamentary system not only at the Centre, but also in the states.
The features of parliamentary government in India are:
(a) Presence of nominal and real executives;
(b) Majority party rule,
(c) Collective responsibility of the executive to the legislature,
(d) Membership of the ministers in the legislature,
(e) Leadership of the Prime Minister or the Chief Minister,
(f) Dissolution of the lower House (Lok Sabha or Assembly).

Even though the Indian parliamentary system is largely based on the British pattern, there are some fundamental differences between the two. For example, the Indian Parliament is not a sovereign body like the British Parliament. Further, the Indian State has an elected head (republic) while the British State has hereditary head (monarchy). In a parliamentary system whether in India or Britain, the role of
the Prime Minister has become so significant and crucial that the political scientists like to call it a ‘Prime Ministerial Government’.

6. Synthesis of Parliamentary Sovereignty and Judicial Supremacy:
The doctrine of sovereignty of Parliament is associated with the British Parliament, while the principle of judicial supremacy with that of the American Supreme Court. Just as the Indian parliamentary system differs from the British system, the scope of judicial review power of the Supreme Court in India is narrower than that of what exists in US. This is because the American Constitution provides for ‘due process of law’ against that of ‘procedure established by law’ contained in the Indian Constitution (Article 21). Therefore, the framers of the Indian Constitution have preferred a proper synthesis between the British principle of parliamentary sovereignty and the American principle of judicial supremacy. The Supreme Court, on the one hand, can declare the parliamentary laws as unconstitutional through its power of judicial review. The Parliament, on the other hand, can amend the major portion of the Constitution through its constituent power.

7. Integrated and Independent Judiciary
The Indian Constitution establishes a judicial system that is  integrated as well as independent. The Supreme Court stands at the top of the integrated judicial system in the country. Below it, there are high courts at the state level. Under a high court, there is a hierarchy of subordinate courts, that is, district courts and other lower courts. This single system of courts enforces both the central laws as well as the
state laws, unlike in USA, where the federal laws are enforced by the federal judiciary and the state laws are enforced by the state judiciary.
The Supreme Court is a federal court, the highest court of appeal, the guarantor of the fundamental rights of the citizens and the guardian of the Constitution. Hence, the Constitution has made various provisions to ensure its independence–security of tenure of the judges, fixed service conditions for the judges, all the expenses of the Supreme Court charged on the Consolidated Fund of India, prohibition on discussion on the conduct of judges in the legislatures, ban on practice after retirement, power to punish for its contempt vested in the Supreme Court, separation of the judiciary from the executive, and so on.

8. Fundamental Rights:
Part III of the Indian Constitution guarantees six11 fundamental rights to all the citizens:
(a) Right to Equality (Articles 14–18);
(b) Right to Freedom (Articles 19–22);
(c) Right against Exploitation (Articles 23–24);
(d) Right to Freedom of Religion (Articles 25–28);
(e) Cultural and Educational Rights (Articles 29–30); and
(f) Right to Constitutional Remedies (Article 32).

The Fundamental Rights are meant for promoting the idea of political democracy. They operate as limitations on the tyranny of the executive and arbitrary laws of the legislature. They are justiciable in nature, that is, they are enforceable by the courts for their violation. The aggrieved person can directly go to the Supreme Court which can issue the writs of habeas corpus, mandamus, prohibition, certiorari and quo warranto for the restoration of his rights. 
However, the Fundamental Rights are not absolute and subject to reasonable restrictions. Further, they are not sacrosanct and can be curtailed or repealed by the Parliament through a Constitutional Amendment Act. They can also be suspended during the operation of a National Emergency except the rights guaranteed by Articles 20 and 21.

9. Directive Principles of State Policy:
According to Dr. B.R. Ambedkar, the Directive Principles of State Policy is a ‘novel feature’ of the Indian Constitution. They are enumerated in Part IV of the Constitution. They can be classified into three broad cat-egories–socialistic, Gandhian and liberalintellectual. The Directive Principles are meant for promoting the ideal of social and economic democracy. They seek to establish a ‘welfare state’ in India. However, unlike the Fundamental Rights, the directives are non-justiciable in nature, that is, they are not enforceable by the courts for their violation. Yet, the Constitution itself declares that ‘these principles are fundamental in the governance of the country and it shall be the duty of the state to apply these principles in making laws’. Hence, they impose a moral obligation on the state authorities for their application. But, the real force (sanction) behind them is political, that is, public opinion. In the Minerva Mills case (1980), the Supreme Court held that ‘the Indian Constitution is founded on the bedrock of the balance between the Fundamental Rights and the Directive Principles’. 

10. Fundamental Duties:
The original constitution did not provide for the Fundamental Duties of the citizens. These were added during the operation of internal emergency (1975–77) by the 42nd Constitutional Amendment Act of 1976 on the recommendation of the Swaran Singh Committee. The 86th Constitutional Amendment Act of 2002 added one more fundamental duty. 
The Part IV-A of the Constitution (which consists of only one Article 51-A) specifies the eleven Fundamental Duties viz., to respect the Constitution, national flag and national anthem; to protect the sovereignty, unity and integrity of the country; to promote the spirit of common brotherhood amongst all the people; to preserve the rich heritage of our composite culture and so on. 
The fundamental duties serve as a reminder to citizens that while enjoying their rights, they have also to be quite conscious of duties they owe to their country, their society and to their fellowcitizens However, like the Directive Principles, the duties are also non-justiciable in nature.

11. A Secular State:
The Constitution of India stands for a Secular State. Hence, it does not uphold any particular religion as the official religion of the Indian State. The following provisions of the Constitution reveal the secular character of the Indian State:
(a) The term ‘secular’ was added to the Preamble of the Indian Constitution by the 42nd Constitutional Amendment Act of 1976.
(b) The Preamble secures to all citizens of India liberty of belief, faith and worship.
(c) The State shall not deny to any person equality before the law or equal protection of the laws (Article 14).
(d) The State shall not discriminate against any citizen on the ground of religion (Article 15).
(e) Equality of opportunity for all citizens in matters of public employment (Article 16).
(f) All persons are equally entitled to freedom of conscience and the right to freely profess, practice and propagate any religion (Article 25).
(g) Every religious denomination or any of its section shall have the right to manage its religious affairs (Article 26).
(h) No person shall be compelled to pay any taxes for the promotion of a particular religion (Article 27).
(i) No religious instruction shall be provided in any educational institution maintained by the State (Article 28).
(j) Any section of the citizens shall have the right to conserve its distinct language, script or culture (Article 29).
(k) All minorities shall have the right to establish and administer educational institutions of their choice (Article 30).
(l) The State shall endeavour to secure for all the citizens a Uniform Civil Code (Article 44).

The Western concept of secularism connotes a complete separation between the religion (the church) and the state (the politics). This negative concept of secularism is inapplicable in the Indian situation where the society is multireligious. Hence, the Indian Constitution embodies the positive concept of secularism, i.e., giving equal respect to all religions or protecting all religions equally.
Moreover, the Constitution has also abolished the old system of communal repre-sentation13 , that is, reservation of seats in the legislatures on the basis of religion. However, it provides for the temporary reservation of seats for the scheduled castes and scheduled tribes to ensure adequate representation to them.

12. Universal Adult Franchise:
The Indian Constitution adopts universal adult franchise as a basis of elections to the Lok Sabha and the state legislative  assemblies. Every citizen who is not less than 18 years of age has a right to vote without any discrimination of caste, race, religion, sex, literacy, wealth and so on. The voting age was reduced to 18 years from 21 years in 1989 by the 61st Constitutional Amendment Act of 1988. The introduction of universal adult franchise by the Constitution-makers was a bold experiment and highly remarkable in view of the vast size of the country, its huge population, high poverty, social inequality and overwhelming illiteracy.
Universal adult franchise makes democracy broad-based, enhances the self-respect and prestige of the common people, upholds the principle of equality, enables minorities to protect their interests and opens up new hopes and vistas for weaker sections.

13. Single Citizenship:
Though the Indian Constitution is federal and envisages a dual polity (Centre and states), it provides for only a single citizenship, that is, the Indian citizenship. In countries like USA, on the other hand, each person is not only a citizen of USA, but also a citizen of the particular state to which he belongs. Thus, he owes allegiance to both and enjoys dual sets of rights–one conferred by the National government and
another by the state government. In India, all citizens irrespective of the state in which they are born or reside enjoy the same political and civil rights of citizenship all over the country and no discrimination is made between them.
Despite the constitutional provision for a single citizenship and uniform rights for all the people, India has been witnessing the communal riots, class conflicts, caste wars, linguistic clashes and ethnic disputes. This means that the cherished goal of the Constitution-makers to build a united and integrated Indian nation has not been fully realised.

14. Independent Bodies:
The Indian Constitution not only provides for the legislative, executive and judicial organs of the Government (Central and state) but also establishes certain independent bodies. They are envisaged by the Constitution as the bulkworks of the democratic system of Government in India. These are: 
(a) Election Commission to ensure free and fair elections to the Parliament, the state legislatures, the office of President of India and the office of Vice-president of India.
(b) Comptroller and Auditor-General of India to audit the accounts of the Central and state governments. He acts as the guardian of public purse and comments on the legality and propriety of Government expenditure.
(c) Union Public Service Commission to conduct examinations for recruitment to all-India services15 and higher Central services and to advise the President on disciplinary matters.
(d) State Public Service Commission in every state to conduct examinations for recruitment to state services and to advice the governor on disciplinary matters.

The Constitution ensures the independence of these bodies through various provisions like security of tenure, fixed service conditions, expenses being charged on the Consolidated Fund of India, and so on.

15. Emergency Provisions:
The Indian Constitution contains elaborate emergency provisions to enable the President to meet any extraordinary situation effectively. The rationality behind the incorporation of these provisions is to safeguard the sovereignty, unity, integrity and security of the country, the democratic political system and the Constitution. The Constitution envisages three types of emergencies,
namely:
(a) National emergency on the ground of war or external aggression or armed rebellion16 (Article 352);
(b) State emergency (President’s Rule) on the ground of failure of Constitutional machinery in the states (Article 356) or failure to comply with the directions of the Centre (Article 365); and
(c) Financial emergency on the ground of threat to the financial stability or credit of India (Article 360).
During an emergency, the Central Government becomes allpowerful and the states go into the total control of the centre. It converts the federal structure into a unitary one without a formal amendment of the Constitution. This kind of transformation of the political system from federal (during normal times) to unitary (during emergency) is a unique feature of the Indian Constitution.

16. Three-tier Government:
Originally, the Indian Constitution, like any other federal Constitution, provided for a dual polity and contained provisions with regard to the organisation and powers of the Centre and the states. Later, the 73rd and 74th Constitutional Amendment Acts (1992) have added a third-tier of Government (i.e., local) which is not found in any other Constitution of the world. The 73rd Amendment Act of 1992 gave constitutional recognition to the panchay-ats (rural local governments) by adding a new Part IX17 and a new Schedule 11 to the Constitution. Similarly, the 74th Amendment Act of 1992 gave constitutional recognition to the municipalities (urban local governments) by adding a new Part IX-A18 and a new Schedule 12 to the Constitution.

17. Co-operative Societies:
The 97th Constitutional Amendment Act of 2011 gave a constitutional status and protection to co-operative societies. In this context, it made the following three changes in the Constitution:
1. It made the right to form co-operative societies a fundamental right (Article 19).
2. It included a new Directive Principle of State Policy on promotion of co-operative societies (Article 43-B).
3. It added a new Part IX-B in the Constitution which is entitled as “The Co-operative Societies” (Articles 243-ZH to 243-ZT).
The new Part IX-B contains various provisions to ensure that the co-operative societies in the country function in a democratic, professional, autonomous and economically sound manner. It empowers the Parliament in respect of multi-state cooperative societies and the state legislatures in respect of other co-operative societies to make the appropriate law.

CRITICISM OF THE CONSTITUTION:
The Constitution of India, as framed and adopted by the Constituent Assembly of India, has been criticized on the following grounds:
1. A Borrowed Constitution:
The critics opined that the Indian Constitution contains nothing new and original. They described it as a ‘borrowed Constitution’ or a ‘bag of borrowings’ or a ‘hotch-potch Constitution’ or a ‘patchwork’ of several documents of the world constitutions. However, this criticism is unfair and illogical. This is because, the framers of the Constitution made necessary modifications in the
features borrowed from other constitutions for their suitability to the Indian conditions, at the same time avoiding their faults. 
While answering the above criticism in the Constituent Assembly, Dr. B.R. Ambedkar, the Chairman of the Drafting Committee, said : “One likes to ask whether there can be anything new in a Constitution framed at this hour in the history of the world. More than hundred years have rolled over when the first written Constitution was drafted. It has been followed by many countries reducing their constitutions to writing. What the scope of a Constitution should be has long been settled. Similarly, what are the fundamentals of a Constitution are recognized all over the world. Given these facts, all Constitutions in their main provisions must look similar. The only new things, if there can be any, in a Constitution framed so late in the day are the variations made to remove the faults and to accommodate it to the needs of the
country. The charge of producing a blind copy of the Constitutions of other countries is based, I am sure, on an inadequate study of the Constitution”.

2. A Carbon Copy of the 1935 Act:
The critics said that the framers of the Constitution have included a large number of the provisions of the Government of India Act of 1935 into the Constitution of India. Hence, they called the Constitution as a “Carbon Copy of the 1935 Act” or an “Amended Version of the 1935 Act”. For example, N. Srinivasan observed that the Indian Constitution is “both in language and substance a close copy of the Act of 1935”. Similarly, Sir Ivor Jennings, a British Constitutionalist, said that “the Constitution derives directly from the Government of India Act of 1935 from which, in fact, many of its provisions are copied almost textually”.
Further, P.R. Deshmukh, a member of the Constituent Assembly, commented that “the Constitution is essentially the Government of India Act of 1935 with only adult franchise added”.
The same Dr. B.R. Ambedkar answered the above criticism in the Constituent Assembly in the following way : “As to the accusation that the Draft Constitution has reproduced a good part of the provisions of the Government of India Act, 1935, I make no apologies. There is nothing to be ashamed of in borrowing. It involves no plagiarism. Nobody holds any patent rights in the fundamental ideas of a Constitution. What I am sorry about is that the provisions taken from the Government of India Act, 1935, relate mostly to the details of administration”.

3. Un-Indian or Anti-Indian:
According to the critics, the Indian Constitution is ‘un-Indian’ or ‘anti-Indian’ because it does not reflect the political traditions and the spirit of India. They said that the foreign nature of the Constitution makes it unsuitable to the Indian situation or unworkable in India. In this context, K. Hanumanthaiya, a member of the Constituent Assembly, commented : “We wanted the music of Veena or Sitar, but here we have the music of an English band. That was because our Constitution-makers were educated that way”. Similarly, Lokanath Misra, another member of the Constituent Assembly, criticized the Constitution as a “slavish imitation of the west, much more - a slavish surrender to the west”. Further, Lakshminarayan Sahu, also a member of the Constituent Assembly, observed: “The ideals on which this draft Constitution is framed have no manifest relation to the fundamental spirit of India. This Constitution would not prove suitable and would break down soon after being brought into operation”.

4. An Un-Gandhian Constitution:
According to the critics, the Indian Constitution is un-Gandhian because it does not contain the philosophy and ideals of Mahatma Gandhi, the father of the Indian Nation. They opined that the Constitution should have been raised and built upon village panchayats and district panchayats. In this context, the same member of the Constituent Assembly, K. Hanumanthaiya, said: “That is exactly the kind of Constitution Mahatma Gandhi did not want and did not envisage”. T. Prakasam, another member of the Constituent Assembly, attributed this lapse to Ambedkar’s non-participation in the Gandhian movement and the antagonism towards the Gandhian ideas.

5. Elephantine Size:
The critics stated that the Indian Constitution is too bulky and too detailed and contains some unnecessary elements. Sir Ivor Jennings, a British Constitutionalist, observed that the provisions borrowed were not always well-selected and that the constitution, generally speaking, was too long and complicated. In this context, H.V. Kamath, a member of the Constituent Assembly, commented : “The emblem and the crest that we have selected for our assembly is an elephant. It is perhaps in consonance with that our constitution too is the bulkiest that the world has produced”. He also said: “I am sure, the House does
not agree that we should make the Constitution an elephantine one”.

6. Paradise of the Lawyers:
According to the critics, the Indian Constitution is too legalistic and very complicated. They opined that the legal language and phraseology adopted in the constitution makes it a complex document. The same Sir Ivor Jennings called it a “lawyer’s paradise”.
In this context, H.K. Maheswari, a member of the Constituent Assembly, observed : “The draft tends to make people more litigious, more inclined to go to law courts, less truthful and less likely to follow the methods of truth and non-violence. If I may say so, the draft is really a lawyer’s paradise. It opens up vast avenues of litigation and will give our able and ingenious lawyers plenty of work to do”.
Similarly, P.R. Deshmukh, another member of the Constituent Assembly, said : “I should, however, like to say that the draft of the articles that have been brought before the House by Dr. Ambedkar seems to my mind to be far too ponderous like the ponderous tomes of a law manual. A document dealing with a constitution hardly uses so much of padding and so much of verbiage. Perhaps it is difficult for them to compose a document which should be, to my mind, not a law manual but a sociopolitical document, a vibrating, pulsating and life-giving document. But, to our misfortune, that was not to be, and we have been
burdened with so much of words, words and words which could have been very easily eliminated.”

Note: Part VII (dealing with Part-B states) was deleted by the 7th Amendment Act (1956). On the other hand, both Part IV-A and Part XIV-A were added by the 42nd Amendment Act (1976), while Part IX-A was added by the 74th Amendment Act (1992), and Part IX-B was added by the 97th Amendment Act (2011). 

Preamble of the Constitution:

The American Constitution was the first to begin with a Preamble. Many countries, including India, followed this practice. The term ‘Preamble’ refers to the introduction or preface to the Constitution. It contains the summary or essence of the Constitution. N.A. Palkhivala, an eminent jurist and constitutional expert, called the Preamble as the ‘identity card of the Constitution.’
The Preamble to the Indian Constitution is based on the ‘Objectives Resolution’, drafted and moved by Pandit Nehru, and adopted by the Constituent Assembly1. It has been amended by the 42nd Constitutional Amendment Act (1976), which added three new words–Socialist, Secular and Integrity.

TEXT OF THE PREAMBLE:
The Preamble in its present form reads:
“We, THE PEOPLE OF INDIA, having solemnly resolved to constitute India into a SOVEREIGN SOCIALIST SECULAR DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC and to secure to all its citizens: JUSTICE, Social, Economic and Political; LIBERTY of thought, expression, belief, faith and worship; EQUALITY of status and of opportunity; and to promote among them all; FRATERNITY assuring the dignity of the individual and the unity and integrity of the Nation; IN OUR CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY this twenty-sixth day of November, 1949, do HEREBY ADOPT, ENACT AND GIVE TO OURSELVES THIS CONSTITUTION”.

INGREDIENTS OF THE PREAMBLE:
The Preamble reveals four ingredients or components:
1. Source of authority of the Constitution: The Preamble states that the Constitution derives its authority from the people of India.
2. Nature of Indian State: It declares India to be of a sovereign, socialist, secular democratic and republican polity.
3. Objectives of the Constitution: It specifies justice, liberty, equality and fraternity as the objectives.
4. Date of adoption of the Constitution: It stipulates November 26, 1949, as the date.

KEY WORDS IN THE PREAMBLE:
Certain key words–Sovereign, Socialist, Secular, Democratic, Republic, Justice, Liberty, Equality and Fraternity–are explained as follows:
1. Sovereign:
The word ‘sovereign’ implies that India is neither a dependency nor a dominion of any other nation, but an independent state. There is no authority above it, and it is free to conduct its own affairs (both internal and external). Though in 1949, India declared the continuation of her full membership of the Commonwealth of Nations and accepted the British Crown as the head of the Commonwealth, this extraconstitutional declaration does not affect India’s sovereignty in any manner. Further, India’s membership of the United Nations Organisation (UNO) also in no way constitutes a limitation on her
sovereignty. Being a sovereign state, India can either acquire a foreign territory or cede a part of its territory in favour of a foreign state.

2. Socialist:
Even before the term was added by the 42nd Amendment in 1976, the Constitution had a socialist content in the form of certain Directive Principles of State Policy. In other words, what was hitherto implicit in the Constitution has now been made explicit. Moreover, the Congress party itself adopted a resolution to establish a ‘socialistic pattern of society’ in its Avadi session as early as in 1955 and took measures accordingly. Notably, the Indian brand of socialism is a ‘democratic socialism’ and not a ‘communistic socialism’ (also known as ‘state socialism’) which involves the nationalisation of all means of production and distribution and the abolition of private property. Democratic socialism, on the other hand, holds faith in a ‘mixed economy’ where both public and private sectors co-exist side by side. As the Supreme Court says, ‘Democratic socialism aims to end poverty, ignorance, disease and inequality of opportunity. Indian socialism is a blend of Marxism and Gandhism, leaning heavily towards the Gandhian socialism’. The new Economic Policy (1991) of liberalisation, privatisation and globalisation has, however, diluted the socialist credentials of the Indian State.

3. Secular:
The term ‘secular’ too was added by the 42nd Constitutional Amendment Act of 1976. However, as the Supreme Court said in 1974, although the words ‘secular state’9 were not expressedly mentioned in the Constitution, there can be no doubt that Constitutionmakers wanted to establish such a state and accordingly Articles 25 to 28 (guaranteeing the fundamental right to freedom of religion) have been included in the constitution. The Indian Constitution embodies the positive concept of secularism ie, all religions in our country (irrespective of their strength) have the same status and support from the state.

4. Democratic:
A democratic polity, as stipulated in the Preamble, is based on the doctrine of popular sovereignty, that is, possession of supreme power by the people. Democracy is of two types–direct and indirect. In direct
democracy, the people exercise their supreme power directly as is the case in Switzerland. There are four devices of direct democracy, namely, Referendum, Initiative, Recall and Plebiscite. In indirect democracy, on the other hand, the representatives elected by the people exercise the supreme power and thus carry on the government and make the laws. This type of democracy, also known as representative democracy, is of two kinds–parliamentary and presidential. The Indian Constitution provides for representative parliamentary democracy under which the executive is responsible to the legislature for all its policies and actions.
Universal adult franchise, periodic elections, rule of law, independence of judiciary, and absence of discrimination on certain grounds are the manifestations of the democratic character of the Indian polity. The term ‘democratic’ is used in the Preamble in the broader sense embracing not only political democracy but also social and economic democracy. This dimension was stressed by Dr. Ambedkar in his concluding speech in the Constituent Assembly on November 25, 1949, in the following way:
“Political democracy cannot last unless there lies at the base of it social democracy. What does social democracy mean? It means a way of life which recognises liberty, equality and fraternity. The principles of liberty, equality and fraternity are not to be treated as separate items in a trinity. They form a union of trinity in the sense that to divorce one from the other is to defeat the very purpose of democracy. Liberty cannot be divorced from equality, equality cannot be divorced from liberty. Nor can liberty and equality be divorced from fraternity. Without equality, liberty would produce the supremacy of the few over the many. Equality without liberty, would kill individual initiative”.
In the same context, the Supreme Court observed in 1997 that: “The Constitution envisions to establish an egalitarian social order rendering to every citizen social, economic and political justice in a social and economic democracy of the Bharat Republic”.

5. Republic:
A democratic polity can be classified into two categories– monarchy and republic. In a monarchy, the head of the state (usually king or queen) enjoys a hereditary position, that is, he comes into office through succession, e.g., Britain. In a republic, on the other hand, the head of the state is always elected directly or indirectly for a fixed period, e.g., USA. Therefore, the term ‘republic’ in our Preamble indicates that
India has an elected head called the president. He is elected indirectly for a fixed period of five years. A republic also means two more things: one, vesting of political sovereignty in the people and not in a single individual like a king; second, the absence of any privileged class and hence all public offices being opened to every citizen without any discrimination.

6. Justice:
The term ‘justice’ in the Preamble embraces three distinct forms– social, economic and political, secured through various provisions of Fundamental Rights and Directive Principles. Social justice denotes the equal treatment of all citizens without any social distinction based on caste, colour, race, religion, sex and so on. It means absence of privileges being extended to any particular section of the society, and improvement in the conditions of backward classes (SCs, STs and OBCs) and women.
Economic justice denotes the non-discrimination between people on the basis of economic factors. It involves the elimination of glaring inequalities in wealth, income and property. A combination of social justice and economic justice denotes what is known as ‘distributive justice’. Political justice implies that all citizens should have equal political rights, equal access to all political offices and equal voice in the  government. The ideal of justice–social, economic and political–has been taken from the Russian Revolution (1917).

7. Liberty:
The term ‘liberty’ means the absence of restraints on the activities of individuals, and at the same time, providing opportunities for the development of individual personalities. The Preamble secures to all citizens of India liberty of thought, expression, belief, faith and worship, through their Fundamental Rights, enforceable in court of law, in case of violation. Liberty as elaborated in the Preamble is very essential for the successful functioning of the Indian democratic system. However, liberty does not mean ‘license’ to do what one likes, and has to be enjoyed within the limitations mentioned in the Constitution itself. In brief, the liberty conceived by the Preamble or Fundamental Rights is not absolute but qualified. The ideals of liberty, equality and fraternity in our Preamble have been taken from the French Revolution (1789–1799).

8. Equality:
The term ‘equality’ means the absence of special privileges to any section of the society, and the provision of adequate opportunities for all individuals without any discrimination.
The Preamble secures to all citizens of India equality of status and opportunity. This provision embraces three dimensions of equality–civic, political and economic.
The following provisions of the chapter on Fundamental Rights ensure civic equality:
(a) Equality before the law (Article 14).
(b) Prohibition of discrimination on grounds of religion, race, caste, sex or place of birth (Article 15).
(c) Equality of opportunity in matters of public employment (Article 16).
(d) Abolition of untouchability (Article 17).
(e) Abolition of titles (Article 18).

There are two provisions in the Constitution that seek to achieve political equality. One, no person is to be declared ineligible for inclusion in electoral rolls on grounds of religion, race, caste or sex (Article 325). Two, elections to the Lok Sabha and the state assemblies to be on the basis of adult suffrage (Article 326). The Directive Principles of State Policy (Article 39) secures to men and women equal right to an adequate means of livelihood and equal pay for equal work.

9. Fraternity:
Fraternity means a sense of brotherhood. The Constitution promotes this feeling of fraternity by the system of single citizenship. Also, the Fundamental Duties (Article 51-A) say that it shall be the duty of every citizen of India to promote harmony and the spirit of common brotherhood amongst all the people of India transcending religious, linguistic, regional or sectional diversities. The Preamble declares that fraternity has to assure two things– the dignity of the individual and the unity and integrity of the nation. The word ‘integrity’ has been added to the preamble by the 42nd Constitutional Amendment (1976).
According to K.M. Munshi, a member of the Drafting Committee of the Constituent Assembly, the phrase ‘dignity of the individual’ signifies that the Constitution not only ensures material betterment and maintain a democratic set-up, but that it also recognises that the personality of every individual is sacred. This is highlighted through some of the provisions of the Fundamental Rights and Directive Principles of State Policy, which ensure the dignity of individuals. Further, the Fundamental Duties (Article 51-A) also protect the dignity of women by stating that it shall be the duty of every citizen of India to renounce practices derogatory to the dignity of women, and also makes it the duty of every citizen of India to uphold and protect the sovereignty, unity and integrity of India.
The phrase ‘unity and integrity of the nation’ embraces both the psychological and territorial dimensions of national integration. Article 1 of the Constitution describes India as a ‘Union of States’ to make it clear that the states have no right to secede from the Union, implying the indestructible nature of the Indian Union. It aims at overcoming hindrances to national integration like communalism, regionalism, casteism, linguism, secessionism and so on.

SIGNIFICANCE OF THE PREAMBLE:
The Preamble embodies the basic philosophy and fundamental values–political, moral and religious–on which the Constitution is based. It contains the grand and noble vision of the Constituent Assembly, and reflects the dreams and aspirations of the founding fathers of the Constitution. In the words of Sir Alladi Krishnaswami Iyer, a member of the Constituent Assembly who played a significant role in making the Constitution, ‘The Preamble to our Constitution expresses what we had thought or dreamt so long’. According to K.M. Munshi, a member of the Drafting Committee of the Constituent Assembly, the Preamble is the ‘horoscope of our sovereign democratic republic’. Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava, another member of the Constituent Assembly, summed up the importance of the Preamble in the following words: ‘The Preamble is the most precious part of the Constitution. It is the soul of the Constitution. It is a key to the Constitution. It is a jewel set in the Constitution. It is a proper yardstick with which one can measure the worth of the Constitution’.
Sir Ernest Barker, a distinguished English political scientist, paid a glowing tribute to the political wisdom of the authors of the Preamble. He described the Preamble as the ‘key-note’ to the Constitution. He was so moved by the text of the preamble that he quoted it at the opening of his popular book, Principles of Social and Political Theory (1951).
M. Hidayatullah, a former Chief Justice of India, observed, ‘Preamble resembles the Declaration of Independence of the United States of America, but is more than a declaration. It is the soul of our Constitution, which lays down the pattern of our political society. It contains a solemn resolve, which nothing but a revolution can alter.

PREAMBLE AS PART OF THE CONSTITUTION:
One of the controversies about the Preamble is as to whether it is a part of the Constitution or not. In the Berubari Union16 case (1960), the Supreme Court said that the Preamble shows the general purposes behind the several provisions in the Constitution, and is thus a key to the minds of the makers of the Constitution. Further, where the terms used in any article are ambiguous or capable of more than one meaning, some assistance at interpretation may be taken from the objectives enshrined in the Preamble. Despite this recognition of the significance of the Preamble, the Supreme Court specifically opined that Preamble is not a part of the Constitution. In the Kesavananda Bharati case (1973), the Supreme Court rejected the earlier opinion and held that Preamble is a part of the Constitution. It observed that the Preamble is of extreme importance and the Constitution should be read and interpreted in the light of the grand and noble vision expressed in the Preamble. 
In the LIC of India case (1995) also, the Supreme Court again held that the Preamble is an integral part of the Constitution. Like any other part of the Constitution, the Preamble was also enacted by the Constituent Assembly; but, after the rest of the Constitution was already enacted. The reason for inserting the Preamble at the end was to ensure that it was in conformity with the Constitution as adopted by the Constituent Assembly. While forwarding the Preamble for votes, the President of the Constituent Assembly said, ‘The question is that Preamble stands part of the Constitution’19. The motion was then adopted. Hence, the current opinion held by the Supreme Court that the Preamble is a part of the Constitution, is in consonance with the opinion of the founding fathers of the Constitution. However, two things should be noted:
1. The Preamble is neither a source of power to legislature nor a prohibition upon the powers of legislature.
2. It is non-justiciable, that is, its provisions are not enforceable in courts of law.

AMENABILITY OF THE PREAMBLE:
The question as to whether the Preamble can be amended under Article 368 of the Constitution arose for the first time in the historic Kesavananda Bharati case (1973). It was urged that the Preamble cannot be amended as it is not a part of the Constitution. The petitioner contended that the amending power in Article 368 cannot be used to destroy or damage the basic elements or the fundamental features of the Constitution, which are enshrined in the Preamble.
The Supreme Court, however, held that the Preamble is a part of the Constitution. The Court stated that the opinion tendered by it in the Berubari Union (1960) in this regard was wrong, and held that the Preamble can be amended, subject to the condition that no amendment is done to the ‘basic features’. In other words, the Court held that the basic elements or the fundamental features of the Constitution as contained in the Preamble cannot be altered by an amendment under Article 368. 
The Preamble has been amended only once so far, in 1976, by the 42nd Constitutional Amendment Act, which has added three new words–Socialist, Secular and Integrity–to the Preamble. This amendment was held to be valid.

Union and its Territory:
Articles 1 to 4 under Part-I of the Constitution deal with the Union and its territory.

UNION OF STATES:
Article 1 describes India, that is, Bharat as a ‘Union of States’ rather than a ‘Federation of States’. This provision deals with two things: one, name of the country; and two, type of polity. There was no unanimity in the Constituent Assembly with regard to the name of the country. Some members suggested the traditional name (Bharat), while other advocated the modern name (India). Hence, the Constituent Assembly had to adopt a mix of both (‘India, that is, Bharat’) .
Secondly, the country is described as ‘Union’ although its Constitution is federal in structure. According to Dr. B.R. Ambedkar, the phrase ‘Union of States’ has been preferred to ‘Federation of States’ for two reasons: one, the Indian Federation is not the result of an agreement among the states like the American Federation; and two, the states have no right to secede from the federation. The federation is an Union because it is indestructible. The country is an integral whole and divided into different states only for the convenience of administration.
According to Article 1, the territory of India can be classified into three categories:
1. Territories of the states
2. Union territories
3. Territories that may be acquired by the Government of India at any time.

The names of states and union territories and their territorial extent are mentioned in the first schedule of the Constitution. At present, there are 28 states and 9 union territories. The provisions of the Constitution pertaining to the states are applicable to all the states in the same manner2. However, the special provisions (under Part XXI) applicable to the States of Maharashtra, Gujarat, Nagaland, Assam, Manipur, Andhra Pradesh, Telangana, Sikkim, Mizoram, Arunanchal Pradesh, Goa and Karnataka override the general provisions relating to the states as a class. Further, the Fifth and Sixth Schedules contain separate provisions with respect to the administration of scheduled areas and tribal areas within the states. 
Notably, the ‘Territory of India’ is a wider expression than the ‘Union of India’ because the latter includes only states while the former includes not only the states, but also union territories and territories that may be acquired by the Government of India at any future time. The states are the members of the federal system and share a distribution of powers with the Centre. The union territories and the acquired territories, on the other hand, are directly administered by the Central government. Being a sovereign state, India can acquire foreign territories according to the modes recognised by international law, i.e.,
cession (following treaty, purchase, gift, lease or plebiscite),  occupation (hitherto unoccupied by a recognised ruler), conquest or subjugation. For example, India acquired several foreign territories such as Dadra and Nagar Haveli; Goa, Daman and Diu; Puducherry; and Sikkim since the commencement of the  Constitution.

Article 2 empowers the Parliament to ‘admit into the Union of India, or establish, new states on such terms and conditions as it thinks fit’. Thus, Article 2 grants two powers to the Parliament: (a) the power to admit into the Union of India new states; and (b) the power to establish new states. The first refers to the admission of states which are already in existence, while the second refers to the establishment of states which were not in existence before. 
Notably, Article 2 relates to the admission or establishment of new states that are not part of the Union of India. Article 3, on the other hand, relates to the formation of or changes in the existing states of the Union of India. In other words, Article 3 deals with the internal re-adjustment inter se of the territories of the constituent states of the Union of India. 

PARLIAMENT’S POWER TO REORGANISE THE STATES:
Article 3 authorises the Parliament to:
(a) form a new state by separation of territory from any state or by uniting two or more states or parts of states or by uniting any territory to a part of any state;
(b) increase the area of any state;
(c) diminish the area of any state;
(d) alter the boundaries of any state; and
(e) alter the name of any state.
However, Article 3 lays down two conditions in this regard: one, a bill contemplating the above changes can be introduced in the Parliament only with the prior recommendation of the President; and two, before recommending the bill, the President has to refer the same to the state legislature concerned for expressing its views within a specified period.
Further, the power of Parliament to form new states includes the power to form a new state or union territory by uniting a part of any state or union territory to any other state or union territory. The President (or Parliament) is not bound by the views of the state legislature and may either accept or reject them, even if the views are received in time. Further, it is not necessary to make a fresh reference to the state legislature every time an amendment to the bill is moved and accepted in Parliament. In case of a union territory, no reference need be made to the concerned legislature to ascertain its views and the Parliament can itself take any action as it deems fit. It is, thus, clear that the Constitution authorises the Parliament to form new states or alter the areas, boundaries or names of the existing states without their consent. In other words, the Parliament can redraw the political map of India according to its will. Hence, the territorial integrity or continued existence of any state is not guaranteed by the Constitution. Therefore, India is rightly described as ‘an indestructible union of destructible states’. The Union Government can destroy the states whereas the state governments cannot destroy the Union. 
In USA, on the other hand, the territorial integrity or continued existence of a state is guaranteed by the Constitution. The American Federal Government cannot form new states or alter the borders of
existing states without the consent of the states concerned. That is why the USA is described as ‘an indestructible union of indestructible states.’ Moreover, the Constitution (Article 4) itself declares that laws
made for admission or establishment of new states (under Article 2) and formation of new states and alteration of areas, boundaries or names of existing states (under Articles 3) are not to be considered as amendments of the Constitution under Article 368. This means that such laws can be passed by a simple majority and by the ordinary legislative process.

Does the power of Parliament to diminish the areas of a state (under Article 3) include also the power to cede Indian territory to a foreign country?
The decision of the Central Government to cede part of a territory known as Berubari Union (West Bengal) to Pakistan led to political agitation and controversy and thereby necessitated the Presidential reference. The Supreme Court held that the power of Parliament to diminish the area of a state (under Article 3) does not cover cession of Indian territory to a foreign country. Hence, Indian territory can be ceded to a foreign state only by amending the Constitution under Article 368. Consequently, the 9th Constitutional Amendment Act (1960) was enacted to transfer the said territory to Pakistan. On the other hand, the Supreme Court in 1969 ruled that, settlement of a boundary dispute between India and another country does not require a constitutional amendment. It can be done by executive action as it does not involve cession of Indian territory to a foreign country.

EXCHANGE OF TERRITORIES WITH BANGLADESH:
The 100th Constitutional Amendment Act (2015) was enacted to give effect to the acquiring of certain territories by India and transfer of certain other territories to Bangladesh in pursuance of the agreement and its protocol entered into between the Governments of India and Bangladesh. Under this deal, India transferred 111 enclaves to Bangladesh, while Bangladesh transferred 51 enclaves to India. In addition, the deal also involved the transfer of adverse possessions and the demarcation of a 6.1 km undemarcated border stretch. For these three purposes, the amendment modified the provisions relating to the territories of four states (Assam, West Bengal, Meghalaya and Tripura) in the First Schedule of the Constitution. The background of this amendment is as follows:
1. India and Bangladesh have a common land boundary of approximately 4096.7 kms. The India-East Pakistan land boundary was determined as per the Radcliffe Award of 1947. Disputes arose out of some provisions in the Radcliffe Award, which were sought to be resolved through the Bagge Award of 1950. Another effort was made to settle these disputes by the Nehru-Noon Agreement of 1958. However, the issue relating to division of Berubari Union was challenged before the Supreme Court. To comply with the opinion rendered by the Supreme Court, the Constitution (9th Amendment) Act, 1960 was passed by the Parliament. Due to the continuous litigation and other political developments at that time, the Constitution (9th Amendment) Act, 1960 could not be notified in respect of territories in former East Pakistan (presently Bangladesh).
2. On May 16, 1974, the Agreement between India and Bangladesh concerning the demarcation of the land boundary and related matters was signed between both the countries to find a solution to the complex nature of the border demarcation involved. This Agreement was not ratified as it involved, inter alia, transfer of territory which requires a Constitutional Amendment. In this connection, it was also required to identify the precise area on the ground which would be transferred. Subsequently, the issues relating to demarcation of un-demarcated boundary; the territories in adverse possession; and exchange of enclaves were identified and resolved by signing a Protocol on September 6, 2011, which forms an integral part of the Land Boundary Agreement between India and Bangladesh, 1974.
The Protocol was prepared with support and concurrence of the concerned state governments of Assam, Meghalaya, Tripura and West Bengal.

EVOLUTION OF STATES AND UNION TERRITORIES:
Integration of Princely States:
At the time of independence, India comprised two categories of political units, namely, the British provinces (under the direct rule of British government) and the princely states (under the rule of native princes but subject to the paramountcy of the British Crown). The Indian Independence Act (1947) created two independent and separate dominions of India and Pakistan and gave three options to the princely states viz., joining India, joining Pakistan or remaining independent. Of the 552 princely states situated within the geographical boundaries of India, 549 joined India and the remaining 3 (Hyderabad, Junagarh and Kashmir) refused to join India. However, in course of time, they were also integrated with India–Hyderabad by means of police action, Junagarh by means of referendum and Kashmir by the Instrument of Accession.
In 1950, the Constitution contained a four-fold classification of the states and territories of the Indian Union–Part A, Part B and Part C states and Part D territories5. In all, they numbered 29. Part A states comprised nine erstwhile governor’s provinces of British India. Part B states consisted of nine erstwhile princely states with legislatures. Part C states consisted of erstwhile chief commissioner’s provinces of British India and some of the erstwhile princely states. These Part C states (in all 10 in number) were centrally administered. The Andaman and Nicobar Islands were kept as the solitary Part D territories.

Dhar Commission and JVP Committee:
The integration of princely states with the rest of India has purely an ad hoc arrangement. There has been a demand from different regions, particularly South India, for reorganisation of states on linguistic basis. Accordingly, in June 1948, the Government of India appointed the Linguistic Provinces Commission under the chairmanship of S.K. Dhar to examine the feasibility of this. The commission submitted its report in December, 1948, and recommended the reorganisation of states on the basis of administrative convenience rather than linguistic factor. This created much resentment and led to the appointment of another Linguistic Provinces Committee by the Congress in December, 1948, itself to examine the whole question afresh. It consisted of Jawaharlal Nehru, Vallahbhai Patel and Pattabhi Sitaramayya and
hence, was popularly known as JVP Committee6. It submitted its report in April, 1949, and formally rejected language as the basis for reorganisation of states.
However, in October, 1953, the Government of India was forced to create the first linguistic state, known as Andhra state, by separating the Telugu speaking areas from the Madras state. This followed a prolonged popular agitation and the death of Potti Sriramulu, a Congress person of standing, after a 56-day hunger strike for the cause.

Fazl Ali Commission:
The creation of Andhra state intensified the demand from other regions for creation of states on linguistic basis. This forced the Government of India to appoint (in December, 1953) a threemember States Reorganisation Commission under the chairmanship of Fazl Ali to re-examine the whole question. Its other two members were K.M. Panikkar and H.N. Kunzru. It submitted its report in September 1955 and broadly accepted language as the basis of reorganisation of states. But, it rejected the theory of ‘one language-one state’. Its view was that the unity of India should be regarded as the primary consideration in any redrawing of the country’s political units. It identified four major factors that can be taken into account in any scheme of reorganisation of states:
(a) Preservation and strengthening of the unity and security of the country.
(b) Linguistic and cultural homogeneity.
(c) Financial, economic and administrative considerations.
(d) Planning and promotion of the welfare of the people in each state as well as of the nation as a whole.

The commission suggested the abolition of the four-fold classification of states and territories under the original Constitution and creation of 16 states and 3 centrally administered territories. The Government of India accepted these recommendations with certain minor modifications. By the States Reorganisation Act (1956) and the 7th Constitutional Amendment Act (1956), the distinction between Part A and Part B states was done away with and Part C states were abolished. Some of them were merged with adjacent states and some other were designated as union territories. As a result, 14 states and 6 union
territories were created on November 1, 1956. 
The States Reorganisation Act (1956) established the new state of Kerala by merging the Travancore - Cochin State with the Malabar District of Madras state and Kasargode of South Canara (Dakshina Kannada). It merged the Telugu-speaking areas of Hyderabad state with the Andhra state to create the Andhra Pradesh state. Further, it merged the Madya Bharat state, Vindya Pradesh state and Bhopal state into the Madya Pradesh state. Similarly, it merged the Saurashtra state and Kutch state into that of the Bombay state, the Coorg state into that of Mysore state; the Patiala and East Punjab States Union (Pepsu) into that of Punjab state; and the Ajmer state into that of Rajastan state. Moreover, it created the new union territory of Laccadive, Minicoy and Amindivi Islands from the territory detached from the Madras state.

New States and Union Territories Created After 1956:
Even after the large-scale reorganisation of the states in 1956, the political map of India underwent continuous changes due to the pressure of popular agitations and political conditions. The demand for the creation of some more states on the basis of language or cultural homogeneity resulted in the bifurcation of existing states. Maharashtra and Gujarat
In 1960, the bilingual state of Bombay was divided8 into two separate states–Maharashtra for Marathispeaking people and Gujarat for Gujaratispeaking people. Gujarat was established as the 15th state of the Indian Union. 

Dadra and Nagar Haveli: The Portuguese ruled this territory until its liberation in 1954. Subsequently, the administration was carried on till 1961 by an administrator chosen by the people themselves. It was  converted into a union territory of India by the 10th Constitutional Amendment Act, 1961.
Goa, Daman and Diu: India acquired these three territories from the Portuguese by means of a police action in 1961. They were constituted as a union territory by the 12th Constitutional Amendment Act, 1962. Later, in 1987, Goa was conferred a statehood. Consequently, Daman and Diu was made a separate union territory. 

Puducherry: The territory of Puducherry comprises the former French establishments in India known as Puducherry, Karaikal, Mahe and Yanam. The French handed over this territory to India in 1954.
Subsequently, it was administered as an ‘acquired territory’, till 1962 when it was made a union territory by the 14th Constitutional Amendment Act.

Nagaland: In 1963, the State of Nagaland was formed10 by taking the Naga Hills and Tuensang area out of the state of Assam. This was done to satisfy the movement of the hostile Nagas. However, before
giving Nagaland the status of the 16th state of the Indian Union, it was placed under the control of governor of Assam in 1961. 

Haryana, Chandigarh and Himachal Pradesh: In 1966, the State of Punjab was bifurcated11 to create Haryana, the 17th state of the Indian Union, and the union territory of Chandigarh. This followed the demand for a separate ‘Sikh Homeland’ (Punjabi Subha) raised by the Akali Dal under the leadership of Master Tara Singh. On the recommendation of the Shah Commission (1966), the Punjabi-speaking areas were constituted into the unilingual state of Punjab, the Hindi-speaking areas were constituted into the State of Haryana and the hill areas were merged with the adjoining union territory of Himachal
Pradesh. In 1971, the union territory of Himachal Pradesh was elevated12 to the status of a state (18th state of the Indian Union).

Manipur, Tripura and Meghalaya: In 1972, the political map of Northeast India underwent a major change. Thus, the two union territories of Manipur and Tripura and the sub-state of Meghalaya got statehood and the two union territories of Mizoram and Arunachal Pradesh (originally known as North-East Frontier Agency–NEFA) came into being. With this, the number of states of the Indian Union increased to 21 (Manipur 19th, Tripura 20th and Meghalaya 21st). Initially, the 22nd Constitutional Amendment Act (1969) created Meghalaya as an ‘autonomous state’ or ‘sub-state’ within the state of Assam with its own legislature and council of ministers. However, this did not satisfy the aspirations of the people of Meghalaya. The union territories of Mizoram and Arunachal Pradesh were also formed out of the territories of Assam.

Sikkim: Till 1947, Sikkim was an Indian princely state ruled by Chogyal. In 1947, after the lapse of British paramountcy, Sikkim became a ‘protectorate’ of India, whereby the Indian Government assumed
responsibility for the defence, external affairs and communications of Sikkim. In 1974, Sikkim expressed its desire for greater association with India. Accordingly, the 35th Constitutional Amendment Act (1974) was enacted by the parliament. This amendment introduced a new class of statehood under the constitution by conferring on Sikkim the status of an ‘associate state’ of the Indian Union. For this purpose, a new Article 2-A and a new schedule (10th Schedule containing the terms and conditions of association) were inserted in the Constitution. This experiment, however, did not last long as it could not fully satisfy
the aspirations of the people of Sikkim. In a referendum held in 1975, they voted for the abolition of the institution of Chogyal and Sikkim becoming an integral part of India. Consequently, the 36th Constitutional Amendment Act (1975) was enacted to make Sikkim a full-fledged state of the Indian Union (the 22nd state). This amendment amended the First and the Fourth Schedules to the Constitution and added a new Article 371-F to provide for certain special provisions with respect to the administration of Sikkim. It also repealed Article 2-A and the 10th Schedule that were added by the 35th Amendment Act of 1974.

Mizoram, Arunachal Pradesh and Goa:
In 1987, three new States of Mizoram,14 Arunachal Pradesh and Goa came into being as the 23rd, 24th and 25th states of the Indian Union respectively. The union territory of Mizoram was conferred the status of a full state as a sequel to the signing of a memorandum of settlement (Mizoram Peace Accord) in 1986 between the Central government and the Mizo National Front, ending the two-decade-old insurgency. Arunachal Pradesh had also been a union territory from 1972. The State of Goa was created by separating the territory of Goa from the Union Territory of Goa, Daman and Diu.

Chhattisgarh, Uttarakhand and Jharkhand:
In 2000, three more new States of Chhattisgarh,17 Uttarakhand and Jharkhand were created out of the territories of Madhya Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh and Bihar, respectively. These became the 26th, 27th and 28th states of the Indian Union, respectively. 

Telangana: 
In 2014, the new state of Telangana came into existence as the 29th state of the Indian Union. It was carved out of the territories of Andhra Pradesh.

The Andhra State Act (1953) formed the first linguistic state of India, known as the state of Andhra, by taking out the Telugu speaking areas from the State of Madras (now Tamil Nadu). Kurnool was the capital of Andhra state and the state high court was established at Guntur. The States Reorganisation Act (1956) merged the Teluguspeaking areas of Hyderabad state with the Andhra state to create the enlarged Andhra Pradesh state. The capital of the state was shifted to Hyderabad. Again, the Andhra Pradesh Reorganisation Act (2014) bifurcated the Andhra Pradesh into two separate states, namely, the Andhra Pradesh (residuary) and the Telangana. 

Jammu & Kashmir and Ladakh:
Till 2019, the erstwhile State of Jammu and Kashmir had its own constitution and thus enjoyed a special status by virtue of Article 370 of the Constitution of India. In 2019, this special status was abolished by a presidential order known as “The Constitution (Application to Jammu and Kashmir) Order, 2019”. This order superseded the earlier order known as “The Constitution (Application to Jammu and Kashmir) Order, 1954”. The 2019 order extended all the provisions of the Constitution of India to Jammu and Kashmir also. However, the inoperative Article 370 continue to remain in the text of the Constitution of India.
Further, the Jammu and Kashmir Reorganisation Act, 2019, bifurcated the erstwhile State of Jammu and Kashmir into two separate union territories, namely, the union territory of Jammu & Kashmir and the union territory of Ladakh. The union territory of Jammu and Kashmir comprises all the districts of the erstwhile State of Jammu and Kashmir except the Kargil and Leh districts which have gone to the union territory of Ladakh.

Thus, the number of states and union territories increased from 14 and 6 in 1956 to 28 and 9 in 2019, respectively. 

Change of Names:
The names of some states and union territories have also been changed. The United Provinces was the first state to have a new name. It was renamed ‘Uttar Pradesh’ in 1950. In 1969, Madras was renamed ‘Tamil Nadu’. Similarly, in 1973, Mysore was renamed ‘Karnataka’. In the same year, Laccadive, Minicoy and Amindivi Islands were renamed23 ‘Lakshadweep’. In 1992, the Union Territory of Delhi was redesignated as the National Capital Territory of Delhi (without being conferred the status of a fullfledged state) by the 69th Constitutional Amendment Act, 1991. In 2006, Uttaranchal was renamed as ‘Uttarakhand’. In the same year, Pondicherry was renamed26 as ‘Puducherry’. In 2011, Orissa was renamed as ‘Odisha’. 

Laws Made by Parliament Under Article 3 of the Constitution:
1. Assam (Alteration of Boundaries) Act, 1951:
Altered the boundaries of the State of Assam by ceding a strip of territory comprised in that State to Bhutan.

2. Andhra State Act, 1953:
Formed the first linguistic state, known as the State of Andhra, by taking out the Telugu speaking areas from the State of Madras. Kurnool was the capital of Andhra State and the state high court was established at Guntur.

3. Himachal Pradesh and Bilaspur (New State) Act, 1954: 
Formed the new state of Himachal Pradesh by Uniting the existing States of Himachal Pradesh and Bilaspur.

4. Chandernagore (Merger) Act, 1954:
Merged the territory of Chandernagore (a former enclave of French India) into the State of West Bengal.

5. States Reorganisation Act, 1956:
Made the extensive changes in the boundaries of various states for the purpose of meeting the linguistic, regional and local demands. It created 14 states and 6 union territories. The States were:
Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Bihar, Bombay, Jammu and Kashmir, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Madras, Mysore, Orissa, Punjab, Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal. The Union Territories were: Andaman
and Nicobar Islands, Delhi, Himachal Pradesh, Laccadive, Minicoy and Amindivi Islands, Manipur and Tripura. It established the new state of Kerala by merging the TravancoreCochin State with the Malabar district of Madras State and the Kasargode of South Canara (Dakshina Kannada). It merged the Telugu speaking areas of Hyderabad State with the Andhra State to create the Andhra Pradesh State.
Further, it merged the Madhya Bharat State, Vindhya Pradesh State and Bhopal State into the Madhya Pradesh State. Similarly, it merged the Saurashtra State and Kutch State into that of the Bombay State; the Coorg State into that of Mysore State; the Patiala and East Punjab States Union (Pepsu) into that of Punjab State; and the Ajmer State into that of Rajasthan State. Moreover, it created the new union territory of Laccadive, Minicoy and Amindivi Islands from the territory detached from the Madras State.

6. Provided for the transfer of Bihar and West Bengal (Transfer of Territories) Act, certain territories from the State of Bihar to the State of 1956 West Bengal.

7. Rajasthan and Madhya Pradesh (Transfer of Territories) Act, 1959: 
Provided for the transfer of certain territories from the State of Rajasthan to the State of Madhya Pradesh.

8. Andhra Pradesh and Madras (Alteration of Boundaries) Act, 1959:
Provided for the alteration of boundaries of the States of Andhra Pradesh and Madras.

9. Bombay Reorganisation Act, 1960:
Formed the new State of Gujarat (15th state) by taking out the Gujarati speaking areas from the state of Bombay and renamed the other part of the Bombay State as Maharashtra State. The city of Ahmedabad was made the capital of Gujarat.

10. Acquired Territories (Merger) Act, 1960:
Provided for the merger into the States of Assam, Punjab and West Bengal of Certain territories acquired from Pakistan under the agreements entered into between the Governments of India and Pakistan, in
1958 and 1959.

11. State of Nagaland Act, 1962:
 Formed the new State of Nagaland (16th state) by taking out the Naga Hills Tuensang Area from the State of Assam. The Naga Hills - Tuensang Area was a tribal area of Assam specified in the Sixth Schedule of the Constitution.

12. Punjab Reorganisation Act: 
Formed the new State of 1966 Haryana (17th state) by taking out the Hindi speaking areas from the State of Punjab. It also made Chandigarh a new Union Territory as well as a common capital for both
Punjab and Haryana.

13. Bihar and Uttar Pradesh (Alteration of Boundaries) Act, 1968:
Provided for the alteration of boundaries of the States of Bihar and Uttar Pradesh.

14. Andhra Pradesh and Mysore (Transfer of Territory) Act, 1968: 
Provided for the transfer of certain territory from the State of Mysore to the State of Andhra Pradesh.

15. Madras State (Alteration of Name) Act, 1968:
Changed the name of the State of Madras to that of State of Tamil Nadu.

16. Assam Reorganisation (Meghalaya) Act, 1969:
Formed an autonomous state (sub-state) known as Meghalaya, within the State of Assam.

17. State of Himachal Pradesh Act, 1970:
Elevated the Union Territory of Himachal Pradesh to the status of a state (18th state).

18. North-Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) Act, 1971:
Elevated the two Union Territories of Manipur and Tripura to the status of states (19th state and 20th state respectively). It also conferred full statehood on Meghalaya (21st state), which was previously a substate within the State of Assam. Further, it formed the two Union Territories of Mizoram and Arunachal Pradesh out of the territories of Assam.

19. Mysore State (Alteration of Name) Act, 1973:
Changed the name of the state of Mysore to that of the State of Karnataka.

20. Laccadive, Minicoy and Changed the name of the Amindivi Islands (Alteration Union Territory of the of Name) Act, 1973:
Laccadive, Minicoy and Amindivi Islands to that of the Union Territory of Lakshadweep.

21. Haryana and Uttar Pradesh Provided for the alteration of (Alteration of Boundaries) boundaries of the States of Act, 1979: Haryana and Uttar Pradesh.

22. State of Mizoram Act, 1986 Elevated the Union Territory of Mizoram to the status of a state (23rd state).

23. State of Arunachal Pradesh Elevated the Union Territory Act, 1986 of Arunachal Pradesh to the status of a State (24th state).

24. Goa, Daman and Diu Reorganisation Act, 1987:
Formed the new State of Goa (25th State) by separating the territory of Goa from the Union Territory of Goa, Daman and Diu.

25. Madhya Pradesh Reorganisation Act, 2000:
Formed the new state of Chhattisgarh (26th state) out of the territories of the State of Madhya Pradesh.

26. Uttar Pradesh Reorganisation Act, 2000:
Created the new State of Uttaranchal (27th state) by carving out its territory from that of the territories of the state of Uttar Pradesh.

27. Bihar Reorganisation Act, 2000:
Established the new State of Jharkhand (28th state) by separating its territory from the territories of the State of Bihar.

28. Uttaranchal (Alteration of Name) Act, 2006:
Changed the name of the State of Uttaranchal to that of the State of Uttarakhand.

29. Pondicherry (Alteration of Name) Act, 2006:
Renamed the Union Territory of Pondicherry as the Union Territory of Puducherry.

30. Orissa (Alteration of Name) Changed the name of the Act, 2011:
State of Orissa to that of the State of Odisha.

31. Andhra Pradesh Reorganisation Act, 2014:
Formed the new state of Telangana (29th state) by carving out its territory from the territories of the state of Andhra Pradesh.

32. Jammu and Kashmir Reorganisation Act, 2019:
Bifurcated the erstwhile state of Jammu and Kashmir into two separate Union territories, namely, the Union territory of Jammu & Kashmir and the Union territory of Ladakh.

Citizenship: MEANING AND SIGNIFICANCE:
Like any other modern state, India has two kinds of people–citizens and aliens. Citizens are full members of the Indian State and owe allegiance to it. They enjoy all civil and political rights. Aliens, on the other hand, are the citizens of some other state and hence, do not enjoy all the civil and political rights. They are of two categories–friendly aliens or enemy aliens. Friendly aliens are the subjects of those countries that have cordial relations with India. Enemy aliens, on the other hand, are the subjects of that country that is at war with India. They enjoy lesser rights than the friendly aliens, eg, they do not enjoy protection against arrest and detention (Article 22).
The Constitution confers the following rights and privileges on the citizens of India (and denies the same to aliens):
1. Right against discrimination on grounds of religion, race, caste, sex or place of birth (Article 15).
2. Right to equality of opportunity in the matter of public employment (Article 16).
3. Right to freedom of speech and expression, assembly, association, movement, residence and profession (Article 19).
4. Cultural and educational rights (Articles 29 and 30). 
5. Right to vote in elections to the Lok Sabha and state legislative assembly.
6. Right to contest for the membership of the Parliament and the state legislature.
7. Eligibility to hold certain public offices, that is, President of India, Vice-President of India, judges of the Supreme Court and the high courts, Governor of states, Attorney General of India and Advocate General of states. 
Along with the above rights, the citizens also owe certain duties towards the Indian State, as for example, paying taxes, respecting the national flag and national anthem, defending the country and so on. In India both a citizen by birth as well as a naturalised citizen are eligible for the office of President while in USA, only a citizen by birth and not a naturalised citizen is eligible for the office of President.

CONSTITUTIONAL PROVISIONS:
The Constitution deals with the citizenship from Articles 5 to 11 under Part II. However, it contains neither any permanent nor any elaborate provisions in this regard. It only identifies the persons who became
citizens of India at its commencement (i.e., on January 26, 1950). It does not deal with the problem of acquisition or loss of citizenship subsequent to its commencement. It empowers the Parliament to enact a law to provide for such matters and any other matter relating to citizenship. Accordingly, the Parliament has enacted the Citizenship Act (1955), which has been amended from time to time.
According to the Constitution, the following four categories of persons became the citizens of India at its commencement i.e., on January 26, 1950:
1. A person who had his domicile in India and also fulfilled any one of the three conditions, viz., if he was born in India; or if either of his parents was born in India; or if he has been ordinarily resident in
India for five years immediately before the commencement of the Constitution, became a citizen of India. 
2. A person who migrated to India from Pakistan became an Indian citizen if he or either of his parents or any of his grandparents was born in undivided India and also fulfilled any one of the two conditions viz., in case he migrated to India before July 19, 1948; he had been ordinarily resident in India since the date of his migration; or in case he migrated to India on or after July 19, 1948, he had been registered as a citizen of India. But, a person could be so registered only if he had been resident in India for six months preceding the date of his application for registration.
3. A person who migrated to Pakistan from India after March 1, 1947, but later returned to India for resettlement could become an Indian citizen. For this, he had to be resident in India for six months preceding the date of his application for registration.
4. A person who, or any of whose parents or grandparents, was born in undivided India but who is ordinarily residing outside India shall become an Indian citizen if he has been registered as a citizen of
India by the diplomatic or consular representative of India in the country of his residence, whether before or after the commencement of the Constitution. Thus, this provision covers the overseas Indians
who may want to acquire Indian citizenship.
To sum up, these provisions deal with the citizenship of (a) persons domiciled in India; (b) persons migrated from Pakistan; (c) persons migrated to Pakistan but later returned; and (d) persons of Indian origin
residing outside India. 

The other constitutional provisions with respect to the citizenship are as follows:
1. No person shall be a citizen of India or be deemed to be a citizen of India, if he has voluntarily acquired the citizenship of any foreign state.
2. Every person who is or is deemed to be a citizen of India shall continue to be such citizen, subject to the provisions of any law made by Parliament.
3. Parliament shall have the power to make any provision with respect to the acquisition and termination of citizenship and all other matters relating to citizenship.

CITIZENSHIP ACT, 1955:
The Citizenship Act (1955) provides for acquisition and loss of citizenship after the commencement of the Constitution. Originally, the Citizenship Act (1955) also provided for the Commonwealth Citizenship. But, this provision was repealed by the Citizenship (Amendment) Act, 2003.

Acquisition of Citizenship:
The Citizenship Act of 1955 prescribes five ways of acquiring citizenship, viz, birth, descent, registration, naturalisation and incorporation of territory:
1. By Birth: A person born in India on or after January 26, 1950 but before July 1, 1987 is a citizen of India by birth irrespective of the nationality of his parents. A person born in India on or after July 1, 1987 is considered as a citizen of India only if either of his parents is a citizen of India at the time of his birth.
Further, those born in India on or after December 3, 2004 are considered citizens of India only if both of their parents are citizens of India or one of whose parents is a citizen of India and the other is not an
illegal migrant at the time of their birth. The children of foreign diplomats posted in India and enemy aliens cannot acquire Indian citizenship by birth.

2. By Descent:
A person born outside India on or after January 26, 1950 but before December 10, 1992 is a citizen of India by descent, if his father was a citizen of India at the time of his birth. A person born outside India on or after December 10, 1992 is considered as a citizen of India if either of his parents is a citizen of India at the time of his birth. December 3, 2004 onwards, a person born outside India shall not be a
citizen of India by descent, unless his birth is registered at an Indian consulate within one year of the date of birth or with the permission of the Central Government, after the expiry of the said period. An application, for registration of the birth of a minor child, to an Indian consulate shall be accompanied by an undertaking in writing from the parents of such minor child that he or she does not hold the passport of another country.
Further, a minor who is a citizen of India by virtue of descent and is also a citizen of any other country shall cease to be a citizen of India if he does not renounce the citizenship or nationality of another country within six months of his attaining full age.

3. By Registration:
The Central Government may, on an application, register as a citizen of India any person (not being an illegal migrant) if he belongs to any of the following categories, namely:
(a) a person of Indian origin who is ordinarily resident in India for seven years before making an application for registration; 
(b) a person of Indian origin who is ordinarily resident in any country or place outside undivided India;
(c) a person who is married to a citizen of India and is ordinarily resident in India for seven years before making an application for registration;
(d) minor children of persons who are citizens of India;
(e) a person of full age and capacity whose parents are registered as citizens of India;
(f) a person of full age and capacity who, or either of his parents, was earlier citizen of independent India, and is ordinarily resident in India for twelve months immediately before making an application for registration;
(g) a person of full age and capacity who has been registered as an overseas citizen of India cardholder for five years, and who is ordinarily resident in India for twelve months before making an application for registration. 
A person shall be deemed to be of Indian origin if he, or either of his parents, was born in undivided India or in such other territory which became part of India after the August 15, 1947. All the above categories of persons must take an oath of allegiance before they are registered as citizens of India.

4. By Naturalisation:
The Central Government may, on an application, grant a certificate of naturalisation to any person (not being an illegal migrant) if he possesses the following qualifications:
(a) that he is not a subject or citizen of any country where citizens of India are prevented from becoming subjects or citizens of that country by naturalisation;
(b) that, if he is a citizen of any country, he undertakes to renounce the citizenship of that country in the event of his application for Indian citizenship being accepted;
(c) that he has either resided in India or been in the service of a Government in India or partly the one and partly the other, throughout the period of twelve months immediately preceding the date of the application;
(d) that during the fourteen years immediately preceding the said period of twelve months, he has either resided in India or been in the service of a Government in India, or partly the one and partly the other, for periods amounting in the aggregate to not less than eleven years;
(e) that he is of good character;
(f) that he has an adequate knowledge of a language specified in the Eighth Schedule to the Constitution; and
(g) that in the event of a certificate of naturalisation being granted to him, he intends to reside in India, or to enter into or continue in, service under a Government in India or under an international organisation of which India is a member or under a society, company or body of persons established in India. However, the Government of India may waive all or any of the above conditions for naturalisation in the case of a person who has rendered distinguished service to the science, philosophy, art, literature, world peace or human progress. Every naturalised citizen must take an oath of allegiance to the Constitution of India.

5. By Incorporation of Territory:
If any foreign territory becomes a part of India, the Government of India specifies the persons who among the people of the territory shall be the citizens of India. Such persons become the citizens of India from the notified date. For example, when Pondicherry became a part of India, the Government of India issued the Citizenship (Pondicherry) Order (1962), under the Citizenship Act (1955).

6. Special Provisions as to Citizenship of Persons Covered by the Assam Accord The Citizenship (Amendment) Act, 1985, added the following special provisions as to citizenship of persons covered by the Assam Accord (which related to the foreigners’ issue):
(a) All persons of Indian origin who came to Assam before the January 1, 1966 from Bangladesh and who have been ordinarily residents in Assam since the date of their entry into Assam shall be deemed to
be citizens of India as from the January 1, 1966.
(b) Every person of Indian origin who came to Assam on or after the January 1, 1966 but before the March 25, 1971 from Bangladesh and who has been ordinarily resident in Assam since the date of his entry into Assam and who has been detected to be a foreigner shall register himself. Such a registered person shall be deemed to be a citizen of India for all purposes as from the date of expiry of a period
of ten years from the date of detection as a foreigner. But, in the intervening period of ten years, he shall have the same rights and obligations as a citizen of India, excepting the right to vote. 

Loss of Citizenship:
The Citizenship Act (1955) prescribes three ways of losing citizenship whether acquired under the Act or prior to it under the Constitution, viz, renunciation, termination and deprivation: 
1. By Renunciation:
Any citizen of India of full age and capacity can make a declaration renouncing his Indian citizenship. Upon the registration of that declaration, that person ceases to be a citizen of India. However, if such a declaration is made during a war in which India is engaged, its registration shall be withheld by the Central Government. Further, when a person renounces his Indian citizenship, every minor child of that person also loses Indian citizenship. However, when such a child attains the age of eighteen, he may resume Indian citizenship.

2. By Termination:
When an Indian citizen voluntarily (consciously, knowingly and without duress, undue influence or compulsion) acquires the citizenship of another country, his Indian citizenship automatically terminates. This
provision, however, does not apply during a war in which India is engaged.

3. By Deprivation:
It is a compulsory termination of Indian citizenship by the Central government, if:
(a) the citizen has obtained the citizenship by fraud:
(b) the citizen has shown disloyalty to the Constitution of India:
(c) the citizen has unlawfully traded or communicated with the enemy during a war;
(d) the citizen has, within five years after registration or naturalisation, been imprisoned in any country for two years; and
(e) the citizen has been ordinarily resident out of India for seven years continuously.

SINGLE CITIZENSHIP:
Though the Indian Constitution is federal and envisages a dual polity (Centre and states), it provides for only a single citizenship, that is, the Indian citizenship. The citizens in India owe allegiance only to the Union. There is no separate state citizenship. The other federal states like USA and Switzerland, on the other hand, adopted the system of double citizenship. In USA, each person is not only a citizen of USA but also of the particular state to which he belongs. Thus, he owes allegiance to both and enjoys dual sets of rights–one set conferred by the national government and another by the state government. This system creates the problem of discrimination, that is, a state may discriminate in favour of its citizens in matters like right to vote, right to hold public offices, right to practice professions and so on. This problem is avoided in the system of single citizenship prevalent in India. In India, all citizens irrespective of the state in which they are born or reside enjoy the same political and civil rights of citizenship all over the country and no discrimination is made between them. However, this general rule of absence of discrimination is subject to some exceptions, viz,
1. The Parliament (under Article 16) can prescribe residence within a state or union territory as a condition for certain employments or appointments in that state or union territory, or local authority or other authority within that state or union territory. Accordingly, the Parliament enacted the Public Employment (Requirement as to Residence) Act, 1957, and thereby authorised the Government of India to prescribe residential qualification only for appointment to non-Gazetted posts in Andhra Pradesh, Himachal Pradesh, Manipur and Tripura. As this Act expired in 1974, there is no such provision for any state except Andhra Pradesh5 and Telangana5a.
2. The Constitution (under Article 15) prohibits discrimination against any citizen on grounds of religion, race, caste, sex or place of birth and not on the ground of residence. This means that the state can
provide special benefits or give preference to its residents in matters that do not come within the purview of the rights given by the Constitution to the Indian citizens. For example, a state may offer concession in fees for education to its residents.
3. The freedom of movement and residence (under Article 19) is subjected to the protection of interests of any schedule tribe. In other words, the right of outsiders to enter, reside and settle in tribal areas is restricted. Of course, this is done to protect the distinctive culture, language, customs and manners of schedule tribes and to safeguard their traditional vocation and property against exploitation.
4. Till 2019, the legislature of the erstwhile state of Jammu and Kashmir was empowered to:
(a) define the persons who are permanent residents of the state; and
(b) confer any special rights and privileges on such permanent residents as respects:
(i) employment under the state government;
(ii) acquisition of immovable property in the state;
(iii) settlement in the state; and
(iv) right to scholarships and such other forms of aid provided by the government.

The above provision was based on Article 35-A of the Constitution of India. This Article was inserted in the constitution by “The Constitution (Application to Jammu and Kashmir) Order, 1954”. This order was issued by the President under Article 370 of the Constitution which had provided a special status to the erstwhile state of Jammu and Kashmir. In 2019, this special status was abolished by a new presidential order known as “The Constitution (Application to Jammu and Kashmir) Order, 2019”. This order superseded the earlier 1954 order. The Constitution of India, like that of Canada, has introduced the system of single citizenship and provided uniform rights (except in few cases) for the people of India to promote the feeling of fraternity and unity among them and to build an integrated Indian nation. Despite this, India
has been witnessing the communal riots, class conflicts, caste wars, linguistic clashes and ethnic disputes. Thus, the cherished goal of the founding fathers and the Constitution-makers to build an united and
integrated Indian nation has not been fully realised. 

OVERSEAS CITIZENSHIP OF INDIA:
In September 2000, the Government of India (Ministry of External Affairs) had set-up a High Level Committee on the Indian Diaspora under the Chairmanship of L.M. Singhvi. The mandate of the Committee was to make a comprehensive study of the global Indian Diaspora and to recommend measures for a constructive relationship with them. The committee submitted its report in January, 2002. It recommended
the amendment of the Citizenship Act (1955) to provide for grant of dual citizenship to the Persons of Indian Origin (PIOs) belonging to certain specified countries. Accordingly, the Citizenship (Amendment) Act, 2003, made provision for acquisition of Overseas Citizenship of India (OCI) by the PIOs of 16 specified countries other than Pakistan and Bangladesh. It also omitted all provisions recognizing, or relating to the Commonwealth Citizenship from the Principal Act.
Later, the Citizenship (Amendment) Act, 2005, expanded the scope of grant of OCI for PIOs of all countries except Pakistan and Bangladesh as long as their home countries all dual citizenship under their local laws. It must be noted here that the OCI is not actually a dual citizenships as the Indian Constitution forbids dual citizenship or dual nationality (Article 9). Again, the Citizenship (Amendment) Act, 2015, has modified the provisions pertaining to the OCI in the Principal Act. It has introduced a new scheme called “Overseas Citizen of India Cardholder” by merging the PIO card scheme and the OCI card scheme.
The PIO card scheme was introduced on August 19, 2002 and thereafter the OCI card scheme was introduced w.e.f. December 2, 2005. Both the schemes were running in parallel even though the OCI card
scheme had become more popular. This was causing unnecessary confusion in the minds of applicants. Keeping in view some problems being faced by applicants and to provide enhanced facilities to them, the Government of India decided to formulate one single scheme after merging the PIO and OCI schemes, containing positive attributes of both. Hence, for achieving this objective, the Citizenship (Amendment) Act, 2015, was enacted. The PIO scheme was rescinded w.e.f. January 9, 2015 and it was also notified that all existing PIO cardholders shall be deemed to be OCI cardholders w.e.f. January 9, 2015.7 The Citizenship (Amendment) Act, 2015, replaced the nomenclature of “Overseas Citizen of India” with that of “Overseas Citizen of India Cardholder” and made the following provisions in the Principal Act :

I. Registration of Overseas Citizen of India Cardholder:
(1) The Central Government may, on an application made in this behalf, register as an overseas citizen of India cardholder–
(a) any person of full age and capacity,–
(i) who is a citizen of another country, but was a citizen of India time of, or at any time after the commencement of the Constitu
(ii) who is a citizen of another country, but was eligible to be citizen of India at the time of the commencement of the Cons or
(iii) who is a citizen of another country, but belonged to a territory became part of India after the 15th August, 1947; or
(iv) who is a child or a grandchild or a great grandchild of such a or
(b) a person, who is a minor child of a person mentioned in clause (a); or
(c) a person, who is a minor child, and whose both parents are citizens of India or one of the parents is a citizen of India; or
(d) spouse of foreign origin of a citizen of India or spouse of foreign origin of an Overseas Citizen of India Cardholder and whose marriage has been registered and subsisted for a continuous
period of not less than two years immediately preceding the presentation of the application. No person, who or either of whose parents or grandparents or great grandparents is or had been a citizen of Pakistan, Bangladesh or such other country as the Central Government may, specify, shall be eligible for registration as an Overseas Citizen of India Cardholder.

(2) The Central Government may specify the date from which the existing persons of Indian origin cardholders shall be deemed to be overseas citizens of India cardholders.

(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in point (1), the Central Government may, if it is satisfied that special circumstances exist, after recording the circumstances in writing, register a person as an
Overseas Citizen of India Cardholder. 

II. Conferment of Rights on Overseas Citizen of India Cardholder
(1) An overseas citizen of India cardholder shall be entitled to such rights, as the Central Government may specify in this behalf.
(2) An overseas citizen of India cardholder shall not be entitled to the following rights (which are conferred on a citizen of India)–
(a) He shall not be entitled to the right to equality of opportunity in matters of public employment.
(b) He shall not be eligible for election as President.
(c) He shall not be eligible for election as Vice-President.
(d) He shall not be eligible for appointment as a Judge of the Supreme Court.
(e) He shall not be eligible for appointment as a Judge of the High Court.
(f) He shall not be entitled for registration as a voter.
(g) He shall not be eligible for being a member of the House of the People or of the Council of States.
(h) He shall not be eligible for being a member of the State Legislative Assembly or the State Legislative Council.
(i) He shall not be eligible for appointment to public services and posts in connection with affairs of the Union or of any State except for appointment in such services and posts as the Central Government may specify.

III. Renunciation of Overseas Citizen of India Card
(1) If any overseas citizen of India cardholder makes in prescribed manner a declaration renouncing the card registering him as an overseas citizen of India cardholder, the declaration shall be registered by the Central Government, and upon such registration, that person shall cease to be an overseas citizen of India cardholder. 
(2) Where a person ceases to be an overseas citizen of India cardholder, the spouse of foreign origin of that person, who has obtained overseas citizen of India card and every minor child of that person registered as an overseas citizen of India cardholder shall thereupon cease to be an overseas citizen of India cardholder. 

IV. Cancellation of Registration as Overseas Citizen of India Cardholder
The Central Government may cancel the registration of a person as an overseas citizen of India cardholder, if it is satisfied that–
(a) the registration as an overseas citizen of India cardholder was obtained by means of fraud, false representation or the concealment
of any material fact; or
(b) the overseas citizen of India cardholder has shown disaffection towards the Constitution of India; or
(c) the overseas citizen of India cardholder has, during any war in which India may be engaged, unlawfully traded or communicated with an enemy; or
(d) the overseas citizen of India cardholder has, within five years after registration, been sentenced to imprisonment for a term of not less than two years; or
(e) it is necessary so to do in the interests of the sovereignty and integrity of India, the security of India, friendly relations of India with any foreign country, or in the interests of the general public; or
(f) the marriage of an overseas citizen of India cardholder–
(i) has been dissolved by a competent court of law or otherwise; or
(ii) has not been dissolved but, during the subsistence of such marriage he has solemnised marriage with any other person.

Fundamental Rights:
The Fundamental Rights are enshrined in Part III of the Constitution from Articles 12 to 35. In this regard, the framers of the Constitution derived inspiration from the Constitution of USA (i.e., Bill of Rights).
Part III of the Constitution is rightly described as the Magna Carta of India.1 It contains a very long and comprehensive list of ‘justiciable’ Fundamental Rights. In fact, the Fundamental Rights in our
Constitution are more elaborate than those found in the Constitution of any other country in the world, including the USA. The Fundamental Rights are guaranteed by the Constitution to all
persons without any discrimination. They uphold the equality of all individuals, the dignity of the individual, the larger public interest and unity of the nation.
The Fundamental Rights are meant for promoting the ideal of  political democracy. They prevent the establishment of an authoritarian and despotic rule in the country, and protect the liberties and freedoms of the people against the invasion by the State. They operate as limitations on the tyranny of the executive and arbitrary laws of the legislature. In short, they aim at establishing ‘a government of laws and not of men’. 
The Fundamental Rights are named so because they are guaranteed and protected by the Constitution, which is the fundamental law of the land. They are ‘fundamental’ also in the sense that they are most essential for the all-round development (material, intellectual, moral and spiritual) of the individuals. Originally, the Constitution provided for seven Fundamental Rights viz,
1. Right to equality (Articles 14–18)
2. Right to freedom (Articles 19–22)
3. Right against exploitation (Articles 23–24)
4. Right to freedom of religion (Articles 25–28)
5. Cultural and educational rights (Articles 29–30)
6. Right to property (Article 31)
7. Right to constitutional remedies (Article 32)
However, the right to property was deleted from the list of Fundamental Rights by the 44th Amendment Act, 1978. It is made a legal right under Article 300-A in Part XII of the Constitution. So at present, there are only six Fundamental Rights.

FEATURES OF FUNDAMENTAL RIGHTS:
The Fundamental Rights guaranteed by the Constitution are characterised by the following:
1. Some of them are available only to the citizens while others are available to all persons whether citizens, foreigners or legal persons like corporations or companies.
2. They are not absolute but qualified. The state can impose reasonable restrictions on them. However, whether such restrictions are reasonable or not is to be decided by the courts. Thus, they strike a balance between the rights of the individual and those of the society as a whole, between individual liberty and social control.
3. All of them are available against the arbitrary action of the state. However, some of them are also available against the action of private individuals.
4. Some of them are negative in character, that is, place limitations on the authority of the State, while others are positive in nature, conferring certain privileges on the persons.
5. They are justiciable, allowing persons to move the courts for their enforcement, if and when they are violated.
6. They are defended and guaranteed by the Supreme Court. Hence, the aggrieved person can directly go to the Supreme Court, not necessarily by way of appeal against the judgement of the high courts.
7. They are not sacrosanct or permanent. The Parliament can curtail or repeal them but only by a constitutional amendment act and not by an ordinary act. Moreover, this can be done without affecting the ‘basic structure’ of the Constitution.
8. They can be suspended during the operation of a National Emergency except the rights guaranteed by Articles 20 and 21. Further, the six rights guaranteed by Article 19 can be suspended only when emergency is declared on the grounds of war or external aggression (i.e., external emergency) and not on the ground of armed rebellion (i.e., internal emergency).
9. Their scope of operation is limited by Article 31A (saving of laws providing for acquisition of estates, etc.), Article 31B (validation of certain acts and regulations included in the 9th Schedule) and Article 31C (saving of laws giving effect to certain directive principles).
10. Their application to the members of armed forces, para-military forces, police forces, intelligence agencies and analogous services can be restricted or abrogated by the Parliament (Article 33).
11. Their application can be restricted while martial law is in force in any area. Martial law means ‘military rule’ imposed under abnormal circumstances to restore order (Article 34). It is different from the imposition of national emergency.
12. Most of them are directly enforceable (self-executory) while a few of them can be enforced on the basis of a law made for giving effect to them. Such a law can be made only by the Parliament and not by state legislatures so that uniformity throughout the country is maintained (Article 35).

DEFINITION OF STATE:
The term ‘State’ has been used in different provisions concerning the fundamental rights. Hence, Article 12 has defined the term for the purposes of Part III. According to it, the State includes the following:
(a) Government and Parliament of India, that is, executive and legislative organs of the Union government. 
(b) Government and legislature of states, that is, executive and legislative organs of state government.
(c) All local authorities, that is, municipalities, panchayats, district boards, improvement trusts, etc.
(d) All other authorities, that is, statutory or non-statutory authorities like LIC, ONGC, SAIL, etc.
Thus, State has been defined in a wider sense so as to include all its agencies. It is the actions of these agencies that can be challenged in the courts as violating the Fundamental Rights. According to the Supreme Court, even a private body or an agency working as an instrument of the State falls within the meaning of the ‘State’ under Article 12.

LAWS INCONSISTENT WITH FUNDAMENTAL RIGHTS:
Article 13 declares that all laws that are inconsistent with or in derogation of any of the fundamental rights shall be void. In other words, it expressively provides for the doctrine of judicial review. This power has been conferred on the Supreme Court (Article 32) and the high courts (Article 226) that can declare a law unconstitutional and invalid on the ground of contravention of any of the Fundamental Rights.
The term ‘law’ in Article 13 has been given a wide connotation so as to include the following:
(a) Permanent laws enacted by the Parliament or the state legislatures;
(b) Temporary laws like ordinances issued by the president or the state governors;
(c) Statutory instruments in the nature of delegated legislation (executive legislation) like order, bye-law, rule, regulation or notification; and
(d) Non-legislative sources of law, that is, custom or usage having the force of law.
Thus, not only a legislation but any of the above can be challenged in the courts as violating a Fundamental Right and hence, can be declared as void.
Further, Article 13 declares that a constitutional amendment is not a law and hence cannot be challenged. However, the Supreme Court held in the Kesavananda Bharati case2 (1973) that a Constitutional
amendment can be challenged on the ground that it violates a fundamental right that forms a part of the ‘basic structure’ of the Constitution and hence, can be declared as void.

1. Right to equality (Articles 14–18):
(a) Equality before law and equal protection of laws (Article 14).
(b) Prohibition of discrimination on grounds of religion, race, caste, sex or place of birth (Article 15).
(c) Equality of opportunity in matters of public employment (Article 16).
(d) Abolition of untouchability and prohibition of its practice (Article 17).
(e) Abolition of titles except military and academic (Article 18).

2. Right to freedom (Articles19–22):
(a) Protection of six rights regarding freedom of: (i) speech and expression, (ii) assembly, (iii) association, (iv) movement, (v) residence, and (vi) profession (Article 19).
(b) Protection in respect of conviction for offences (Article 20).
(c) Protection of life and personal liberty (Article 21).
(d) Right to elementary education (Article 21A).
(e) Protection against arrest and detention in certain cases (Article 22).

3. Right against exploitation (Articles 23–24):
(a) Prohibition of traffic in human beings and forced labour (Article 23).
(b) Prohibition of employment of children in factories, etc. (Article 24).

4. Right to freedom of religion (Article 25–28):
(a) Freedom of conscience and free profession, practice and propagation of religion (Article 25).
(b) Freedom to manage religious affairs (Article 26).
(c) Freedom from payment of taxes for promotion of any religion (Article 27).
(d) Freedom from attending religious instruction or worship in certain educational institutions (Article 28).

5. Cultural and educational rights (Articles 29–30):
(a) Protection of language, script and culture of minorities (Article 29).
(b) Right of minorities to establish and administer educational institutions (Article 30).

6. Right to constitutional remedies (Article 32):
Right to move the Supreme Court for the enforcement of fundamental rights including the  writs of (i) habeas corpus, (ii) mandamus, (iii) prohibition, (iv) certiorari, and (v) quo warranto (Article 32).

RIGHT TO EQUALITY:
1. Equality before Law and Equal Protection of Laws:
Article 14 says that the State shall not deny to any person equality before the law or the equal protection of the laws within the territory of India. This provision confers rights on all persons whether citizens or
foreigners. Moreover, the word ‘person’ includes legal persons, viz, statutory corporations, companies, registered societies or any other type of legal person. The concept of ‘equality before law’ is of British origin while the concept of ‘equal protection of laws’ has been taken from the American Constitution. 
The first concept connotes: (a) the absence of any special privileges in favour of any person, (b) the equal subjection of all persons to the ordinary law of the land administered by ordinary law courts, and (c) no person (whether rich or poor, high or low, official or non-official) is above the law. 
The second concept, on the other hand, connotes: (a) the equality of treatment under equal circumstances, both in the privileges conferred and liabilities imposed by the laws, (b) the similar application of the same laws to all persons who are similarly situated, and (c) the like should be treated alike without any discrimination.
Thus, the former is a negative concept while the latter is a positive concept. However, both of them aim at establishing equality of legal status, opportunity and justice. The Supreme Court held that where equals and unequals are treated differently, Article 14 does not apply. While Article 14 forbids class legislation, it permits reasonable classification of persons, objects and transactions by the law. But the classification should not be arbitrary, artificial or evasive. Rather, it should be based on an intelligible differential and substantial distinction. Rule of Law The concept of ‘equality before law’ is an element of the concept of ‘Rule of Law’, propounded by A.V. Dicey, the British jurist. His concept has the following three elements or aspects:
(i) Absence of arbitrary power, that is, no man can be punished except for a breach of law.
(ii) Equality before the law, that is, equal subjection of all citizens (rich or poor, high or low, official or non-official) to the ordinary law of the land administered by the ordinary law courts.
(iii) The primacy of the rights of the individual, that is, the constitution is the result of the rights of the individual as defined and enforced by the courts of law rather than the constitution being the source
of the individual rights. 
The first and the second elements are applicable to the Indian System and not the third one. In the Indian System, the constitution is the source of the individual rights.
The Supreme Court held that the ‘Rule of Law’ as embodied in Article 14 is a ‘basic feature’ of the constitution. Hence, it cannot be destroyed even by an amendment. Exceptions to Equality The rule of equality before law is not absolute and there are constitutional and other exceptions to it. These are mentioned below:
1. The President of India and the Governor of States enjoy the following immunities (Article 361):
(i) The President or the Governor is not answerable to any court the exercise and performance of the powers and duties of office.
(ii) No criminal proceedings shall be instituted or continued against the President or the Governor in any court during his term office.
(iii) No process for the arrest or imprisonment of the President or Governor shall be issued from any court during his term of office 
(iv) No civil proceedings against the President or the Governor shall be instituted during his term of office in any court in respect of act done by him in his personal capacity, whether before or a
he entered upon his office, until the expiration of two months after notice has been delivered to him.
2. No person shall be liable to any civil or criminal proceedings in any court in respect of the publication in a newspaper (or by radio or television) of a substantially true report of any proceedings of either House of Parliament or either House of the Legislature of a State (Article 361-A).
3. No member of Parliament shall be liable to any proceedings in any court in respect of anything said or any vote given by him in Parliament or any committee thereof (Article 105).
4. No member of the Legislature of a state shall be liable to any proceedings in any court in respect of anything said or any vote given by him in the Legislature or any committee thereof (Article 194).
5. Article 31-C is an exception to Article 14. It provides that the laws made by the state for implementing the Directive Principles contained in clause (b) or clause (c) of Article 39 cannot be challenged on the ground that they are violative of Article 14. The Supreme Court held that “where Article 31-C comes in, Article 14 goes out”.
6. The foreign sovereigns (rulers), ambassadors and diplomats enjoy immunity from criminal and civil proceedings.
7. The UNO and its agencies enjoy the diplomatic immunity.

2. Prohibition of Discrimination on Certain Grounds:
Article 15 provides that the State shall not discriminate against any citizen on grounds only of religion, race, caste, sex or place of birth. The two crucial words in this provision are ‘discrimination’ and ‘only’.
The word ‘discrimination’ means ‘to make an adverse distinction with regard to’ or ‘to distinguish unfavourably from others’. The use of the word ‘only’ connotes that discrimination on other grounds is not
prohibited. The second provision of Article 15 says that no citizen shall be subjected to any disability, liability, restriction or condition on grounds only of religion, race, caste, sex, or place of birth with regard to (a) access to shops, public restaurants, hotels and places of public entertainment; or (b) the use of wells, tanks, bathing ghats, road and places of public resort maintained wholly or partly by State funds or
dedicated to the use of general public. This provision prohibits discrimination both by the State and private individuals, while the former provision prohibits discrimination only by the State. There are four exceptions to this general rule of non-discrimination:
(a) The state is permitted to make any special provision for women and children. For example, reservation of seats for women in local bodies or provision of free education for children.
(b) The state is permitted to make any special provision for the advancement of any socially and educationally backward classes of citizens or for the scheduled castes and scheduled tribes. For
example, reservation of seats or fee concessions in public educational institutions.
(c) The state is empowered to make any special provision for the advancement of any socially and educationally backward classes of citizens or for the scheduled castes or the scheduled tribes regarding their admission to educational institutions including private educational institutions, whether aided or unaided by the state, except the minority educational institutions.
(d) The state is empowered to make any special provision for the advancement of any economically weaker sections of citizens. Further, the state is allowed to make a provision for the reservation of upto 10% of seats for such sections in admission to educational institutions including private educational institutions, whether aided or unaided by the state, except the minority educational institutions. This reservation of upto 10% would be in addition to the existing reservations. For this purpose, the economically weaker sections would be notified by the state from time to time on the basis of family income and
other indicators of economic disadvantage.

Reservation for OBCs in Educational Institutions:
The above exception(c) was added by the 93rd Amendment Act of 2005. In order to give effect to this provision, the Centre enacted the Central Educational Institutions (Reservation in Admission) Act, 2006,
providing a quota of 27% for candidates belonging to the Other Backward Classes (OBCs) in all central higher educational institutions including the Indian Institutes of Technology (IITs) and the Indian
Institutes of Management (IIMs). In April 2008, the Supreme Court upheld the validity of both, the Amendment Act and the OBC Quota Act. But, the Court directed the central government to exclude the
‘creamy layer’ (advanced sections) among the OBCs while implementing the law. The children of the following different categories of people belong to ‘creamy layer’ among OBCs and thus will not get the quota benefit :
1. Persons holding constitutional posts like President, VicePresident, Judges of SC and HCs, Chairman and Members of UPSC and SPSCs, CEC, CAG and so on.
2. Group ‘A’ / Class I and Group ‘B’ / Class II Officers of the All India, Central and State Services; and Employees holding equivalent posts in PSUs, Banks, Insurance Organisations, Universities etc., and also in private employment. 
3. Persons who are in the rank of colonel and above in the Army and equivalent posts in the Navy, the Air Force and the Paramilitary Forces.
4. Professionals like doctors, lawyers, engineers, artists, authors, consultants and so on.
5. Persons engaged in trade, business and industry.
6. People holding agricultural land above a certain limit and vacant land or buildings in urban areas.
7. Persons having gross annual income of more than Rs.8 lakh or possessing wealth above the exemption limit. In 1993, when the “creamy layer” ceiling was introduced, it was ₹1 lakh. It was
subsequently revised to Rs.2.5 lakh in 2004, Rs.4.5 lakh in 2008, Rs.6 lakh in 2013 and Rs.8 lakh in 2017.

Reservation for EWSs in Educational Institutions:
The above exception (d) was added by the 103rd Amendment Act of 2019. In order to give effect to this provision, the central government issued an order (in 2019) providing 10% reservation to the
Economically Weaker Sections (EWSs) in admission to educational institutions. The benefit of this reservation can be availed by the persons belonging to EWSs who are not covered under any of the
existing schemes of reservations for SCs, STs and OBCs. The eligibility criteria laid down in this regard is as follows:
1. Persons whose family has gross annual income below Rs.8 lakh are to be identified as EWSs for the benefit of reservation. The income would include income from all sources i.e., salary, agriculture, business, profession etc. and it would be income for the financial year prior to the year of application. 
2. Persons whose family owns or possesses any one of the following assets are to be excluded from being identified as EWSs, irrespective of the family income:
(a) 5 acres of Agricultural land and above.
(b) Residential flat of 1000 sq.ft. and above.
(c) Residential plot of 100 sq.yards and above in notified municipalities.
(d) Residential plot of 200 sq.yards and above in areas other than the notified municipalities.
3. The property held by a family in different locations or different places / cities would be clubbed while applying the land or property holding test to determine EWS status.
4. Family for this purpose would include the person who seeks benefit of reservation, his/her parents and siblings below the age of 18 years as also his/ her spouse and children below the age of 18 years.

3. Equality of Opportunity in Public Employment:
Article 16 provides for equality of opportunity for all citizens in matters of employment or appointment to any office under the State. No citizen can be discriminated against or be ineligible for any
employment or office under the State on grounds of only religion, race, caste, sex, descent, place of birth or residence. There are four exceptions to this general rule of equality of opportunity in public employment:
(a) Parliament can prescribe residence as a condition for certain employment or appointment in a state or union territory or local authority or other authority. As the Public Employment (Requirement as to Residence) Act of 1957 expired in 1974, there is no such provision for any state except Andhra Pradesh and Telangana.
(b) The State can provide for reservation of appointments or posts in favour of any backward class that is not adequately represented in the state services.
(c) A law can provide that the incumbent of an office related to religious or denominational institution or a member of its governing body should belong to the particular religion or denomination.
(d) The state is permitted to make a provision for the reservation of upto 10% of appointments or posts in favour of any economically weaker sections of citizens. This reservation of upto 10% would be in addition to the existing reservation. For this purpose, the economically weaker sections would be notified by the state from time to time on the basis of family income and other indicators of economic disadvantage.

Mandal Commission and Aftermath:
In 1979, the Morarji Desai Government appointed the Second Backward Classes Commission under the chairmanship of B.P. Mandal, a Member of Parliament, in terms of Article 340 of the Constitution to investigate the conditions of the socially and educationally backward classes and suggest measures for their advancement. The commission submitted its report in 1980 and identified as many as 3743 castes as socially and educationally backward classes. They constitute nearly 52% component of the population, excluding the scheduled castes (SCs) and the scheduled tribes (STs). The commission recommended for reservation of 27% government jobs for the Other Backward Classes (OBCs) so that the total reservation for all ((SCs, STs and OBCs) amounts to 50%.
It was after ten years in 1990 that the V.P. Singh Government declared reservation of 27% government jobs for the OBCs. Again in 1991, the Narasimha Rao Government introduced two changes: 
(a) preference to the poorer sections among the OBCs in the 27% quota, i.e., adoption of the economic criteria in granting reservation, and (b) reservation of another 10% of jobs for poorer (economically backward) sections of higher castes who are not covered by any existing schemes of reservation.

In the famous Mandal case (1992), the scope and extent of Article 16(4), which provides for reservation of jobs in favour of backward classes, has been examined thoroughly by the Supreme Court. Though the Court has rejected the additional reservation of 10% for poorer sections of higher castes, it upheld the constitutional validity of 27% reservation for the OBCs with certain conditions, viz,
(a) The advanced sections among the OBCs (the creamy layer) should be excluded from the list of beneficiaries of reservation.
(b) No reservation in promotions; reservation should be confined to initial appointments only. Any existing reservation in promotions can continue for five years only (i.e., upto 1997).
(c) The total reserved quota should not exceed 50% except in some extraordinary situations. This rule should be applied every year.
(d) The ‘carry forward rule’ in case of unfilled (backlog) vacancies is valid. But it should not violate 50% rule.
(e) A permanent statutory body should be established to examine complaints of over-inclusion and under-inclusion in the list of OBCs. 
With regard to the above rulings of the Supreme Court, the government has taken the following actions:
(a) Ram Nandan Committee was appointed to identify the creamy layer among the OBCs. It submitted its report in 1993, which was accepted.
(b) National Commission for Backward Classes was established in 1993 by an act of Parliament. Its mandate was to examine the complaints of under-inclusion, over-inclusion or non-inclusion of any class of citizens in the list of backward classes for the purpose of job reservation. Later, the 102nd Amendment Act of 2018 conferred a constitutional status on the commission and also enlarged its functions. For this purpose, the amendment inserted a new Article 338-B in the constitution.
(c) In order to nullify the ruling with regard to reservation in promotions, the 77th Amendment Act was enacted in 1995. It added a new provision in Article 16 that empowers the State to provide for reservation in promotions of any services under the State in favour of the SCs and STs that are not adequately represented in the state services. Again, the 85th Amendment Act of 2001 provides for ‘consequential seniority’ in the case of promotion by virtue of rule of reservation for the government servants belonging to the SCs and STs with retrospective effect from June 1995.
(d) The ruling with regard to backlog vacancies was nullified by the 81st Amendment Act of 2000. It added another new provision in Article 16 that empowers the State to consider the unfilled reserved vacancies of a year as a separate class of vacancies to be filled up in any succeeding year or years. Such class of vacancies are not to be combined with the vacancies of the year in which they are being filled up to determine the ceiling of 50% reservation on total number of vacancies of that year. In brief, it ends the 50% ceiling on reservation in backlog vacancies. 
(e) The 76th Amendment Act of 1994 has placed the Tamil Nadu Reservations Act9 of 1994 in the Ninth Schedule to protect it from judicial review as it provided for 69 per cent of reservation, far
exceeding the 50 per cent ceiling. 
Reservation for EWSs in Public Employment: The above exception (d) was added by the 103rd Amendment Act of 2019. In order to give effect to this provision, the central government issued an order (in 2019) providing 10% reservation to the Economically Weaker Sections (EWSs) in civil posts and services in the Government of India. The benefit of this reservation can be availed by the persons belonging to EWSs who are not covered under any of the existing schemes of reservation for SCs, STs and OBCs. The eligibility criteria laid down in this regard has already been explained under Article 15.
Further, the scientific and technical posts which satisfy all the following conditions can be exempted from the purview of this reservation:
(i) The posts should be in grades above the lower grade in Group A of the service concerned.
(ii) They should be classified as “scientific or technical” in terms of Cabinet Secretariat Order (1961), according to which scientific and technical posts for which qualifications in the natural sciences or exact sciences or applied sciences or in technology are prescribed and the incumbents of which have to use that knowledge in the discharge of their duties.
(iii) The posts should be for conducting research or for organizing, guiding and directing research.

4. Abolition of Untouchability:
Article 17 abolishes ‘untouchability’ and forbids its practice in any form. The enforcement of any disability arising out of untouchability shall be an offence punishable in accordance with law. In 1976, the Untouchability (Offences) Act, 1955 has been comprehensively amended and renamed as the Protection of Civil Rights Act, 1955 to enlarge the scope and make penal provisions more stringent. The act defines civil right as any right accruing to a person by reason of the abolition of untouchability by Article 17 of the Constitution. 
The term ‘untouchability’ has not been defined either in the Constitution or in the Act. However, the Mysore High Court held that the subject matter of Article 17 is not untouchability in its literal or grammatical sense but the ‘practice as it had developed historically in the country’. It refers to the social disabilities imposed on certain classes of persons by reason of their birth in certain castes. Hence, it does not cover social boycott of a few individuals or their exclusion from religious services, etc.
The Supreme Court held that the right under Article 17 is available against private individuals and it is the constitutional obligation of the State to take necessary action to ensure that this right is not violated.

5. Abolition of Titles:
Article 18 abolishes titles and makes four provisions in that regard:
(a) It prohibits the state from conferring any title (except a military or academic distinction) on any body, whether a citizen or a foreigner.
(b) It prohibits a citizen of India from accepting any title from any foreign state.
(c) A foreigner holding any office of profit or trust under the state cannot accept any title from any foreign state without the consent of the president.
(d) No citizen or foreigner holding any office of profit or trust under the State is to accept any present, emolument or office from or under any foreign State without the consent of the president.
From the above, it is clear that the hereditary titles of nobility like Maharaja, Raj Bahadur, Rai Bahadur, Rai Saheb, Dewan Bahadur, etc, which were conferred by colonial States are banned by Article 18
as these are against the principle of equal status of all.
In 199610 , the Supreme Court upheld the constitutional validity of the National Awards–Bharat Ratna, Padma Vibhushan, Padma Bhushan and Padma Sri. It ruled that these awards do not amount to ‘titles’ within the meaning of Article 18 that prohibits only hereditary titles of nobility. Therefore, they are not violative of Article 18 as the theory of equality does not mandate that merit should not be recognised. However, it also ruled that they should not be used as suffixes or prefixes to the names of awardees. Otherwise, they should forfeit the awards.
These National Awards were instituted in 1954. The Janata Party government headed by Morarji Desai discontinued them in 1977. But they were again revived in 1980 by the Indira Gandhi government.

RIGHT TO FREEDOM:
1. Protection of Six Rights:
Article 19 guarantees to all citizens the six rights. These are:
(i) Right to freedom of speech and expression.
(ii) Right to assemble peaceably and without arms.
(iii) Right to form associations or unions or co-operative societies.10a
(iv) Right to move freely throughout the territory of India.
(v) Right to reside and settle in any part of the territory of India.
(vi) Right to practice any profession or to carry on any occupation, trade or business.
Originally, Article 19 contained seven rights. But, the right to acquire, hold and dispose of property was deleted by the 44th Amendment Act of 1978.

These six rights are protected against only state action and not private individuals. Moreover, these rights are available only to the citizens and to shareholders of a company but not to foreigners or legal persons like companies or corporations, etc. The State can impose ‘reasonable’ restrictions on the enjoyment of these six rights only on the grounds mentioned in the Article 19 itself and not on any other grounds. 

Freedom of Speech and Expression:
It implies that every citizen has the right to express his views, opinions, belief and convictions freely by word of mouth, writing, printing, picturing or in any other manner. The Supreme Court held that the freedom of speech and expression includes the following:
(a) Right to propagate one’s views as well as views of others.
(b) Freedom of the press.
(c) Freedom of commercial advertisements.
(d) Right against tapping of telephonic conversation.
(e) Right to telecast, that is, government has no monopoly on electronic media.
(f) Right against bundh called by a political party or organisation.
(g) Right to know about government activities.
(h) Freedom of silence.
(i) Right against imposition of pre-censorship on a newspaper.
(j) Right to demonstration or picketing but not right to strike.
The State can impose reasonable restrictions on the exercise of the freedom of speech and expression on the grounds of sovereignty and integrity of India, security of the state, friendly relations with foreign
states, public order, decency or morality, contempt of court, defamation, and incitement to an offence. 

Freedom of Assembly:
Every citizen has the right to assemble peaceably and without arms. It includes the right to hold public meetings, demonstrations and take out processions. This freedom can be exercised only on public land
and the assembly must be peaceful and unarmed. This provision does not protect violent, disorderly, riotous assemblies, or one that causes breach of public peace or one that involves arms. This right does not include the right to strike. The State can impose reasonable restrictions on the exercise of right of assembly on two grounds, namely, sovereignty and integrity of India and public order including the maintenance of traffic in the area concerned.
Under Section 144 of Criminal Procedure Code (1973), a magistrate can restrain an assembly, meeting or procession if there is a risk of obstruction, annoyance or danger to human life, health or safety or a disturbance of the public tranquillity or a riot or any affray. Under Section 141 of the Indian Penal Code, as assembly of five or more persons becomes unlawful if the object is (a) to resist the execution of any law or legal process; (b) to forcibly occupy the property of some person; (c) to commit any mischief or criminal trespass; (d) to force some person to do an illegal act; and (e) to threaten the government or its officials on exercising lawful powers.

Freedom of Association:
All citizens have the right to form associations or unions or cooperative societies10b. It includes the right to form political parties, companies, partnership firms, societies, clubs, organisations, trade unions or any body of persons. It not only includes the right to start an association or union but also to continue with the association or union as such. Further, it covers the negative right of not to form or join an
association or union. Reasonable restrictions can be imposed on the exercise of this right by the State on the grounds of sovereignty and integrity of India, public order and morality. Subject to these restrictions, the citizens have complete liberty to form associations or unions for pursuing lawful objectives and purposes. However, the right to obtain recognition of the association is not a fundamental right.
The Supreme Court held that the trade unions have no guaranteed right to effective bargaining or right to strike or right to declare a lockout. The right to strike can be controlled by an appropriate industrial law.

Freedom of Movement:
This freedom entitles every citizen to move freely throughout the territory of the country. He can move freely from one state to another or from one place to another within a state. This right underline the idea that India is one unit so far as the citizens are concerned. Thus, the purpose is to promote national feeling and not parochialism. The grounds of imposing reasonable restrictions on this freedom are two, namely, the interests of general public and the protection of interests of any scheduled tribe. The entry of outsiders in tribal areas is restricted to protect the distinctive culture, language, customs and
manners of scheduled tribes and to safeguard their traditional vocation and properties against exploitation.
The Supreme Court held that the freedom of movement of prostitutes can be restricted on the ground of public health and in the  interest of public morals. The Bombay High Court validated the restrictions on the movement of persons affected by AIDS. The freedom of movement has two dimensions, viz, internal (right to move inside the country) and external (right to move out of the country and right to come back to the country). Article 19 protects only the first dimension. The second dimension is dealt by Article 21 (right to life and personal liberty). 

Freedom of Residence:
Every citizen has the right to reside and settle in any part of the territory of the country. This right has two parts: (a) the right to reside in any part of the country, which means to stay at any place temporarily, and (b) the right to settle in any part of the country, which means to set up a home or domicile at any place permanently. This right is intended to remove internal barriers within the country or between any of its parts. This promotes nationalism and avoids narrow mindedness.
The State can impose reasonable restrictions on the exercise of this right on two grounds, namely, the interest of general public and the protection of interests of any scheduled tribes. The right of outsiders to reside and settle in tribal areas is restricted to protect the distinctive culture, language, customs and manners of scheduled tribes and to safeguard their traditional vocation and properties against exploitation. In many parts of the country, the tribals have been permitted to regulate their property rights in accordance with their customary rules and laws. The Supreme Court held that certain areas can be banned for certain kinds of persons like prostitutes and habitual offenders. 
From the above, it is clear that the right to residence and the right to movement are overlapping to some extent. Both are complementary to each other. Freedom of Profession, etc. All citizens are given the right to practise any profession or to carry on any occupation, trade or business. This right is very wide as it covers all the means of earning one’s livelihood. The State can impose reasonable restrictions on the exercise of this right in the interest of the general public. Further, the State is empowered to:
(a) prescribe professional or technical qualifications necessary for practising any profession or carrying on any occupation, trade or business; and
(b) carry on by itself any trade, business, industry or service whether to the exclusion (complete or partial) of citizens or otherwise. Thus, no objection can be made when the State carries on a trade,
business, industry or service either as a monopoly (complete or partial) to the exclusion of citizens (all or some only) or in competition with any citizen. The State is not required to justify its monopoly. This right does not include the right to carry on a profession or business or trade or occupation that is immoral (trafficking in women or children) or dangerous (harmful drugs or explosives, etc,). The State can absolutely prohibit these or regulate them through licencing.

2. Protection in Respect of Conviction for Offences:
Article 20 grants protection against arbitrary and excessive punishment to an accused person, whether citizen or foreigner or legal person like a company or a corporation. It contains three provisions in
that direction:
(a) No ex-post-facto law: No person shall be (i) convicted of any offence except for violation of a law in force at the time of the commission of the act, nor (ii) subjected to a penalty greater than
that prescribed by the law in force at the time of the commission of the act.
(b) No double jeopardy: No person shall be prosecuted and punished for the same offence more than once.
(c) No self-incrimination: No person accused of any offence shall be compelled to be a witness against himself.

An ex-post-facto law is one that imposes penalties retrospectively (retroactively), that is, upon acts already done or which increases the penalties for such acts. The enactment of such a law is prohibited by
the first provision of Article 20. However, this limitation is imposed only on criminal laws and not on civil laws or tax laws. In other words, a civil liability or a tax can be imposed retrospectively. Further, this
provision prohibits only conviction or sentence under an ex-post-facto criminal law and not the trial thereof. Finally, the protection (immunity) under this provision cannot be claimed in case of preventive detention or demanding security from a person. 
The protection against double jeopardy is available only in proceedings before a court of law or a judicial tribunal. In other words, it is not available in proceedings before departmental or administrative
authorities as they are not of judicial nature. The protection against self-incrimination extends to both oral evidence and documentary evidence. However, it does not extend to (i) compulsory production of material objects, (ii) compulsion to give thumb impression, specimen signature, blood specimens, and (iii) compulsory exhibition of the body. Further, it extends only to criminal proceedings and not to civil proceedings or proceedings which are not of criminal nature.

3. Protection of Life and Personal Liberty:
Article 21 declares that no person shall be deprived of his life or personal liberty except according to procedure established by law. This right is available to both citizens and non-citizens. In the famous Gopalan case11 (1950), the Supreme Court has taken a narrow interpretation of the Article 21. It held that the protection under Article 21 is available only against arbitrary executive action and not from arbitrary legislative action. This means that the State can deprive the right to life and personal liberty of a person based on a law. This is because of the expression ‘procedure established by law’ in Article 21, which is different from the expression ‘due process of law’ contained in the American Constitution. Hence, the validity of a law that has prescribed a procedure cannot be questioned on the ground that the law is unreasonable, unfair or unjust. 
Secondly, the Supreme Court held that the ‘personal liberty’ means only liberty relating to the person or body of the individual. But, in Menaka case (1978), the Supreme Court overruled its judgement 
in the Gopalan case by taking a wider interpretation of the Article 21. Therefore, it ruled that the right to life and personal liberty of a person can be deprived by a law provided the procedure prescribed by that
law is reasonable, fair and just. In other words, it has introduced the American expression ‘due process of law’. In effect, the protection under Article 21 should be available not only against arbitrary executive action but also against arbitrary legislative action. 
Further, the court held that the ‘right to life’ as embodied in Article 21 is not  merely confined to animal existence or survival but it includes within its ambit the right to live with human dignity and all those aspects of life which go to make a man’s life meaningful, complete and worth living. It also ruled that the expression ‘Personal Liberty’ in Article 21 is of the widest amplitude and it covers a variety of rights that go to constitute the personal liberties of a man. 
The Supreme Court has reaffirmed its judgement in the Menaka case in the subsequent cases. It has declared the following rights as part of Article 21:
(1) Right to live with human dignity.
(2) Right to decent environment including pollution free water and air and protection against hazardous industries.
(3) Right to livelihood.
(4) Right to privacy.
(5) Right to shelter.
(6) Right to health.
(7) Right to free education up to 14 years of age.
(8) Right to free legal aid.
(9) Right against solitary confinement.
(10) Right to speedy trial.
(11) Right against handcuffing.
(12) Right against inhuman treatment.
(13) Right against delayed execution.
(14) Right to travel abroad.
(15) Right against bonded labour.
(16) Right against custodial harassment.
(17) Right to emergency medical aid.
(18) Right to timely medical treatment in government hospital.
(19) Right not to be driven out of a state.
(20) Right to fair trial.
(21) Right of prisoner to have necessities of life.
(22) Right of women to be treated with decency and dignity.
(23) Right against public hanging.
(24) Right to road in hilly areas.
(25) Right to information.
(26) Right to reputation.
(27) Right of appeal from a judgement of conviction
(28) Right to family pension
(29) Right to social and economic justice and empowerment
(30) Right against bar fetters
(31) Right to appropriate life insurance policy
(32) Right to sleep
(33) Right to freedom from noise pollution
(34) Right to sustainable development
(35) Right to opportunity.

4. Right to Education:
Article 21 A declares that the State shall provide free and compulsory education to all children of the age of six to fourteen years in such a manner as the State may determine. Thus, this provision makes only elementary education a Fundamental Right and not higher or professional education. This provision was added by the 86th Constitutional Amendment Act of 2002. This amendment is a major milestone in the country’s aim to achieve ‘Education for All’. The government described this step as ‘the dawn of the second revolution in the chapter of citizens’ rights’.
Even before this amendment, the Constitution contained a provision for free and compulsory education for children under Article 45 in Part IV. However, being a directive principle, it was not enforceable by the courts. Now, there is scope for judicial intervention in this regard. This amendment changed the subject matter of Article 45 in directive principles. It now reads–‘The state shall endeavour to provide early childhood care and education for all children until they complete the age of six years.’ It also added a new fundamental duty under Article 51A that reads–‘It shall be the duty of every citizen of India to provide opportunities for education to his child or ward between the age of six and fourteen years’.
In 1993 itself, the Supreme Court recognised a Fundamental Right to primary education in the right to life under Article 21. It held that every child or citizen of this country has a right to free education until he completes the age of 14 years. Thereafter, his right to education is subject to the limits of economic capacity and development of the state. In this judgement, the Court overruled its earlier judgement (1992) which declared that there was a fundamental right to education up to any level including professional education like medicine and engineering.
In pursuance of Article 21A, the Parliament enacted the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education (RTE) Act, 2009. This Act seeks to provide that every child has a right to be provided full time elementary education of satisfactory and equitable quality in a formal school which satisfies certain essential norms and standards. This legislation is anchored in the belief that the values of equality, social justice and democracy and the creation of a just and humane society can be achieved only through provision of inclusive elementary education to all.

5. Protection Against Arrest and Detention:
Article 22 grants protection to persons who are arrested or detained. Detention is of two types, namely, punitive and preventive. Punitive detention is to punish a person for an offence committed by him after
trial and conviction in a court. Preventive detention, on the other hand, means detention of a person without trial and conviction by a court. Its purpose is not to punish a person for a past offence but to prevent him from committing an offence in the near future. Thus, preventive detention is only a precautionary measure and based on suspicion. The Article 22 has two parts–the first part deals with the cases of ordinary law and the second part deals with the cases of preventive detention law.
(a) The first part of Article 22 confers the following rights on a person who is arrested or detained under an ordinary law:
(i) Right to be informed of the grounds of arrest.
(ii) Right to consult and be defended by a legal practitioner.
(iii) Right to be produced before a magistrate within 24 hours including the journey time.
(iv) Right to be released after 24 hours unless the magistrate authorises further detention.
These safeguards are not available to an enemy alien or a person arrested or detained under a preventive detention law. The Supreme Court also ruled that the arrest and detention in the first part of Article 22 do not cover arrest under the orders of a court, civil arrest, arrest on failure to pay the income tax, and deportation of an alien. They apply only to an act of a criminal or quasi-criminal nature or some activity prejudicial to public interest.

(b) The second part of Article 22 grants protection to persons who are arrested or detained under a preventive detention law. This protection is available to both citizens as well as aliens and includes the following:
(i) The detention of a person cannot exceed three months unless advisory board reports sufficient cause for extended detention The board is to consist of judges of a high court.
(ii) The grounds of detention should be communicated to the detenu. However, the facts considered to be against the public interest need not be disclosed.
(iii) The detenu should be afforded an opportunity to make representation against the detention order.

Article 22 also authorises the Parliament to prescribe: 
(a) the circumstances and the classes of cases in which a person can be detained for more than three months under a preventive detention law without obtaining the opinion of an advisory board;
(b) the maximum period for which a person can be detained in any classes of cases under a preventive detention law; and 
(c) the procedure to be followed by an advisory board in an inquiry.

The 44th Amendment Act of 1978 has reduced the period of detention without obtaining the opinion of an advisory board from three to two months. However, this provision has not yet been brought into force, hence, the original period of three months still continues. The Constitution has divided the legislative power with regard to preventive detention between the Parliament and the state legislatures. The Parliament has exclusive authority to make a law of preventive detention for reasons connected with defence, foreign affairs and the security of India. Both the Parliament as well as the state legislatures can concurrently make a law of preventive detention for reasons connected with the security of a state, the maintenance of public order and the maintenance of supplies and services essential to the community.

The preventive detention laws made by the Parliament are:
(a) Preventive Detention Act, 1950. Expired in 1969.
(b) Maintenance of Internal Security Act (MISA), 1971. Repealed in 1978.
(c) Conservation of Foreign Exchange and Prevention of Smuggling Activities Act (COFEPOSA), 1974.
(d) National Security Act (NASA), 1980.
(e) Prevention of Blackmarketing and Maintenance of Supplies of Essential Commodities Act (PBMSECA), 1980.
(f) Terrorist and Disruptive Activities (Prevention) Act (TADA), 1985. Repealed in 1995.
(g) Prevention of Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act (PITNDPSA), 1988.
(h) Prevention of Terrorism Act (POTA), 2002. Repealed in 2004.
(i) Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act (UAPA), 1967, as amended in 2004, 2008, 2012 and 2019.

It is unfortunate to know that no democratic country in the world has made preventive detention as an integral part of the Constitution as has been done in India. It is unknown in USA. It was resorted to in
Britain only during first and second world war time. In India, preventive detention existed even during the British rule. For example, the Bengal State Prisoners Regulation of 1818 and the Defence of India Act of 1939 provided for preventive detention.

RIGHT AGAINST EXPLOITATION:
1. Prohibition of Traffic in Human Beings and Forced Labour:
Article 23 prohibits traffic in human beings, begar (forced labour) and other similar forms of forced labour. Any contravention of this provision shall be an offence punishable in accordance with law. This right is available to both citizens and non-citizens. It protects the individual not only against the State but also against private persons. The expression ‘traffic in human beings’ include:
(a) selling and buying of men, women and children like goods; 
(b) immoral traffic in women and children, including prostitution; 
(c) devadasis; and 
(d) slavery. To punish these acts, the Parliament has made the Immoral Traffic (Prevention) Act13 , 1956.

The term ‘begar ’ means compulsory work without remuneration. It was a peculiar Indian system under which the local zamindars sometimes used to force their tenants to render services without any payment. In addition to begar, the Article 23 prohibits other ‘similar forms of forced labour’ like ‘bonded labour’. The term ‘forced labour’ means compelling a person to work against his will. The word ‘force’ includes not only physical or legal force but also force arising from the compulsion of economic circumstances, that is, working for less than the minimum wage. In this regard, the Bonded Labour System (Abolition) Act, 1976; the Minimum Wages Act, 1948; the Contract Labour Act, 1970 and the Equal Remuneration Act, 1976 were made.
Article 23 also provides for an exception to this provision. It permits the State to impose compulsory service for public purposes, as for example, military service or social service, for which it is not bound to pay. However, in imposing such service, the State is not permitted to make any discrimination on grounds only of religion, race, caste or class.

2. Prohibition of Employment of Children in Factories, etc.:
Article 24 prohibits the employment of children below the age of 14 years in any factory, mine or other hazardous activities like construction work or railway. But it does not prohibit their employment in any harmless or innocent work. 

The Child Labour (Prohibition and Regulation) Act, 1986, is the most important law in this direction. In addition, the Employment of Children Act, 1938; the Factories Act, 1948; the Mines Act, 1952; the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958; the Plantation Labour Act, 1951; the Motor Transport Workers Act, 1951; Apprentices Act, 1961; the Bidi and Cigar Workers Act, 1966; and other similar acts prohibit the employment of children below certain age.

In 1996, the Supreme Court directed the establishment of Child Labour Rehabilitation Welfare Fund in which the offending employer should deposit a fine of Rs. 20,000 for each child employed by him. It also issued directions for the improvement of education, health and nutrition of children.

The Commissions for Protection of Child Rights Act, 2005 was enacted to provide for the establishment of a National Commission and State Commissions for Protection of Child Rights and Children’s Courts for providing speedy trial of offences against children or of violation of child rights. 

In 2006, the government banned the employment of children as domestic servants or workers in business establishments like hotels, dhabas, restaurants, shops, factories, resorts, spas, tea-shops and so
on. It warned that anyone employing children below 14 years of age would be liable for prosecution and penal action. The Child Labour (Prohibition and Regulation) Amendment Act, 2016, amended the Child Labour (Prohibition and Regulation) Act, 1986. It has renamed the Principal Act as the Child and Adolescent Labour (Prohibition and Regulation) Act, 1986.

RIGHT TO FREEDOM OF RELIGION:
1. Freedom of Conscience and Free Profession, Practice and Propagation of Religion Article 25 says that all persons are equally entitled to freedom of conscience and the right to freely profess, practice and propagate religion. The implications of these are:
(a) Freedom of conscience: Inner freedom of an individual to mould his relation with God or Creatures in whatever way he desires.
(b) Right to profess: Declaration of one’s religious beliefs and faith openly and freely.
(c) Right to practice: Performance of religious worship, rituals, ceremonies and exhibition of beliefs and ideas.
(d) Right to propagate: Transmission and dissemination of one’s religious beliefs to others or exposition of the tenets of one’s religion. But, it does not include a right to convert another person to one’s own religion. Forcible conversions impinge on the ‘freedom of conscience’ guaranteed to all the persons alike.

From the above, it is clear that Article 25 covers not only religious beliefs (doctrines) but also religious practices (rituals). Moreover, these rights are available to all persons–citizens as well as noncitizens.
However, these rights are subject to public order, morality, health and other provisions relating to fundamental rights. Further, the State is permitted to:
(a) regulate or restrict any economic, financial, political or other secular activity associated with religious practice; and
(b) provide for social welfare and reform or throw open Hindu religious institutions of a public character to all classes and sections of Hindus.
Article 25 also contains two explanations: one, wearing and carrying of kirpans is to be included in the profession of the Sikh religion; and two, the Hindus, in this context, include Sikhs, Jains and Buddhists.

2. Freedom to Manage Religious Affairs:
According to Article 26, every religious denomination or any of its section shall have the following rights:
(a) Right to establish and maintain institutions for religious and charitable purposes;
(b) Right to manage its own affairs in matters of religion;
(c) Right to own and acquire movable and immovable property; and
(d) Right to administer such property in accordance with law.
Article 25 guarantees rights of individuals, while Article 26 guarantees rights of religious denominations or their sections. In other words, Article 26 protects collective freedom of religion. Like the rights under Article 25, the rights under Article 26 are also subject to public order, morality and health but not subject to other provisions relating to the Fundamental Rights.

The Supreme Court held that a religious denomination must satisfy three conditions:
(a) It should be a collection of individuals who have a system of beliefs (doctrines) which they regard as conducive to their spiritual well-being;
(b) It should have a common organisation; and
(c) It should be designated by a distinctive name.
Under the above criteria, the Supreme Court held that the ‘Ramakrishna Mission’ and ‘Ananda Marga’ are religious denominations within the Hindu religion. It also held that Aurobindo Society is not a religious denomination.

3. Freedom from Taxation for Promotion of a Religion:
Article 27 lays down that no person shall be compelled to pay any taxes for the promotion or maintenance of any particular religion or religious denomination. In other words, the State should not spend the
public money collected by way of tax for the promotion or maintenance of any particular religion. This provision prohibits the State from favouring, patronising and supporting one religion over the
other. This means that the taxes can be used for the promotion or maintenance of all religions. This provision prohibits only levy of a tax and not a fee. This is because the purpose of a fee is to control secular administration of religious institutions and not to promote or maintain religion. Thus, a fee can be levied on pilgrims to provide them some special service or safety measures. Similarly, a fee can be levied on religious endowments for meeting the regulation expenditure.

4. Freedom from Attending Religious Instruction:
Under Article 28, no religious instruction shall be provided in any educational institution wholly maintained out of State funds. However, this provision shall not apply to an educational institution administered
by the State but established under any endowment or trust, requiring imparting of religious instruction in such institution. Further, no person attending any educational institution recognised by the State or receiving aid out of State funds shall be required to attend any religious instruction or worship in that institution without his consent. In case of a minor, the consent of his guardian is needed.
Thus, Article 28 distinguishes between four types of educational institutions:
(a) Institutions wholly maintained by the State.
(b) Institutions administered by the State but established under any endowment or trust.
(c) Institutions recognised by the State.
(d) Institutions receiving aid from the State.
In (a), religious instruction is completely prohibited while in (b), religious instruction is permitted. In (c) and (d), religious instruction is permitted on a voluntary basis.

CULTURAL AND EDUCATIONAL RIGHTS:
1. Protection of Interests of Minorities Article 29 provides that any section of the citizens residing in any part of India having a distinct language, script or culture of its own, shall have the right to conserve the same. Further, no citizen shall be denied admission into any educational institution maintained by the State or receiving aid out of State funds on grounds only of religion, race, caste, or language.
The first provision protects the right of a group while the second provision guarantees the right of a citizen as an individual irrespective of the community to which he belongs. Article 29 grants protection to both religious minorities as well as linguistic minorities. However, the Supreme Court held that the scope of this article is not necessarily restricted to minorities only, as it is commonly assumed to be. This is because of the use of words ‘section of citizens’ in the Article that include minorities as well as majority.

The Supreme Court also held that the right to conserve the language includes the right to agitate for the protection of the language. Hence, the political speeches or promises made for the conservation of the language of a section of the citizens does not amount to corrupt practice under the Representation of the People Act, 1951.

2. Right of Minorities to Establish and Administer Educational Institutions:
Article 30 grants the following rights to minorities, whether religious or linguistic:
(a) All minorities shall have the right to establish and administer educational institutions of their choice.
(b) The compensation amount fixed by the State for the compulsory acquisition of any property of a minority educational institution shall not restrict or abrogate the right guaranteed to them. This provision was added by the 44th Amendment Act of 1978 to protect the right of minorities in this regard. The Act deleted the right to property as a Fundamental Right (Article 31).
(c) In granting aid, the State shall not discriminate against any educational institution managed by a minority. 
Thus, the protection under Article 30 is confined only to minorities (religious or linguistic) and does not extend to any section of citizens (as under Article 29). However, the term ‘minority’ has not been defined anywhere in the Constitution. The right under Article 30 also includes the right of a minority to impart education to its children in its own language. 

Minority educational institutions are of three types:
(a) institutions that seek recognition as well as aid from the State;
(b) institutions that seek only recognition from the State and not aid; and
(c) institutions that neither seek recognition nor aid from the State. 
The institutions of first and second type are subject to the regulatory power of the state with regard to syllabus prescription, academic standards, discipline, sanitation, employment of teaching staff and so on. The institutions of third type are free to administer their affairs but subject to operation of general laws like contract law, labour law, industrial law, tax law, economic regulations, and so on.

In a judgement delivered in the Secretary of Malankara Syrian Catholic College case (2007), the Supreme Court has summarized the general principles relating to establishment and administration of
minority educational institutions in the following way : 
1. The right of minorities to establish and administer educational institutions of their choice comprises the following rights :
(i) To choose its governing body in whom the founders of institution have faith and confidence to conduct and manage affairs of the institution;
(ii) To appoint teaching staff (teachers/ lecturers and he masters/principals) as also non-teaching staff; and to take actions if there is dereliction of duty on the part of any of its employees
(iii) To admit eligible students of their choice and to set up reasonable fee structure; and
(iv) To use its properties and assets for the benefit of the institution

2. The right conferred on minorities under Article 30 is only to ensure equality with the majority and not intended to place the minorities in a more advantageous position vis-a-vis the majority. There is no reverse discrimination in favour of minorities. The general laws of the land relating to national interest, national security, social welfare, public order, morality, health, sanitation, taxation etc., applicable to all, will equally apply to minority institutions also.

3. The right to establish and administer educational institutions is not absolute. Nor does it include the right to maladminister. There can be regulatory measures for ensuring educational character and standards and maintaining academic excellence. There can be checks on administration as are necessary to ensure that the administration is efficient and sound, so as to serve the academic needs of the institution. Regulations made by the State concerning generally the welfare of students and teachers, regulations laying down eligibility criteria and qualifications for appointment, as also conditions of service of employees (both teaching and non-teaching), regulations to prevent exploitation or oppression of employees, and regulations prescribing syllabus and curriculum of study fall under this category. Such regulations do not in any manner interfere with the right under Article 30(1).

4. Subject to the eligibility conditions/ qualifications prescribed by the State being met, the unaided minority educational institutions will have the freedom to appoint teachers/lecturers by adopting any rational procedure of selection.

5. Extention of aid by the State, does not alter the nature and character of the minority educational institutions. The conditions can be imposed by the State to ensure proper utilization of the aid, without however diluting or abridging the right under Article 30(1).

RIGHT TO CONSTITUTIONAL REMEDIES:
A mere declaration of fundamental rights in the Constitution is meaningless, useless and worthless without providing an effective machinery for their enforcement, if and when they are violated. Hence, Article 32 confers the right to remedies for the enforcement of the fundamental rights of an aggrieved citizen. In other words, the right to get the Fundamental Rights protected is in itself a fundamental right.
This makes the fundamental rights real. That is why Dr. Ambedkar called Article 32 as the most important article of the Constitution–‘an Article without which this constitution would be a nullity. It is the very
soul of the Constitution and the very heart of it’. The Supreme Court has ruled that Article 32 is a basic feature of the Constitution. Hence, it cannot be abridged or taken away even by way of an amendment to the Constitution. It contains the following four provisions:
(a) The right to move the Supreme Court by appropriate proceedings for the enforcement of the Fundamental Rights is guaranteed.
(b) The Supreme Court shall have power to issue directions or orders or writs for the enforcement of any of the fundamental rights. The writs issued may include habeas corpus, mandamus, prohibition, certiorari and quo-warranto.
(c) Parliament can empower any other court to issue directions, orders and writs of all kinds. However, this can be done without prejudice to the above powers conferred on the Supreme Court. Any other court here does not include high courts because Article 226 has already conferred these powers on the high courts. 
(d) The right to move the Supreme Court shall not be suspended except as otherwise provided for by the Constitution. Thus the Constitution provides that the President can suspend the right to move any court for the enforcement of the fundamental rights during a national emergency (Article 359).

It is thus clear that the Supreme Court has been constituted as the defender and guarantor of the fundamental rights of the citizens. It has been vested with the ‘original’ and ‘wide’ powers for that purpose.
Original, because an aggrieved citizen can directly go to the Supreme Court, not necessarily by way of appeal. Wide, because its power is not restricted to issuing of orders or directions but also writs of all
kinds.

The purpose of Article 32 is to provide a guaranteed, effective, expeditious, inexpensive and summary remedy for the protection of the fundamental rights. Only the Fundamental Rights guaranteed by the Constitution can be enforced under Article 32 and not any other right like non-fundamental constitutional rights, statutory rights, customary rights and so on. The violation of a fundamental right is the sine qua non for the exercise of the right conferred by Article 32. In other words, the Supreme Court, under Article 32, cannot determine a question that does not involve Fundamental Rights. Article 32 cannot
be invoked simply to determine the constitutionality of an executive order or a legislation unless it directly infringes any of the fundamental rights.

In case of the enforcement of Fundamental Rights, the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court is original but not exclusive. It is concurrent with the jurisdiction of the high court under Article 226. It vests original powers in the high court to issue directions, orders and writs of all kinds for the enforcement of the Fundamental Rights. It means when the Fundamental Rights of a citizen are violated, the aggrieved party
has the option of moving either the high court or the Supreme Court directly.

Since the right guaranteed by Article 32 (ie, the right to move the Supreme Court where a fundamental right is infringed) is in itself a fundamental right, the availability of alternate remedy is no bar to relief
under Article 32. However, the Supreme Court has ruled that where relief through high court is available under Article 226, the aggrieved party should first move the high court.

WRITS–TYPES AND SCOPE:
The Supreme Court (under Article 32) and the high courts (under Article 226) can issue the writs of habeas corpus, mandamus, prohibition, certiorari and quo-warranto. Further, the Parliament (under Article  32) can empower any other court to issue these writs. Since no such provision has been made so far, only the Supreme Court and the high courts can issue the writs and not any other court. Before 1950, only the High Courts of Calcutta, Bombay and Madras had the power to issue the writs. Article 226 now empowers all the high courts to issue the writs.
These writs are borrowed from English law where they are known as ‘prerogative writs’. They are so called in England as they were issued in the exercise of the prerogative of the King who was, and is still, described as the ‘fountain of justice’. Later, the high court started issuing these writs as extraordinary remedies to uphold the rights and liberties of the British people.

The writ jurisdiction of the Supreme Court differs from that of a high court in three respects:
1. The Supreme Court can issue writs only for the enforcement of fundamental rights whereas a high court can issue writs not only for the enforcement of Fundamental Rights but also for any other purpose. The expression ‘for any other purpose’ refers to the enforcement of an ordinary legal right. Thus, the writ jurisdiction of the Supreme Court, in this respect, is narrower than that of high court.
2. The Supreme Court can issue writs against a person or government throughout the territory of India whereas a high court can issue writs against a person residing or against a government or authority located within its territorial jurisdiction only or outside its territorial jurisdiction only if the cause of action arises within its territorial jurisdiction. Thus, the territorial jurisdiction of the Supreme Court for the purpose of issuing writs is wider than that of a high court.
3. A remedy under Article 32 is in itself a Fundamental Right and hence, the Supreme Court may not refuse to exercise its writ jurisdiction. On the other hand, a remedy under Article 226 is discretionary and hence, a high court may refuse to exercise its writ jurisdiction. Article 32 does not merely confer power on the Supreme Court as Article 226 does on a high court to issue writs for the enforcement of fundamental rights or other rights as part of its general jurisdiction. The Supreme Court is thus constituted  as a defender and guarantor of the fundamental rights.

Meaning and scope of different kinds of writs mentioned in Articles 32 and 226 of the Constitution:
Habeas Corpus:
It is a Latin term which literally means ‘to have the body of’. It is an order issued by the court to a person who has detained another person, to produce the body of the latter before it. The court then examines the cause and legality of detention. It would set the detained person free, if the detention is found to be illegal. Thus, this writ is a bulwark of individual liberty against arbitrary detention.
The writ of habeas corpus can be issued against both public authorities as well as private individuals. The writ, on the other hand, is not issued where the 
(a) detention is lawful, 
(b) the proceeding is for contempt of a legislature or a court, 
(c) detention is by a competent court, and 
(d) detention is outside the jurisdiction of the court.

Mandamus:
It literally means ‘we command’. It is a command issued by the court to a public official asking him to perform his official duties that he has failed or refused to perform. It can also be issued against any public
body, a corporation, an inferior court, a tribunal or government for the same purpose.
The writ of mandamus cannot be issued 
(a) against a private individual or body; 
(b) to enforce departmental instruction that does not possess statutory force;
(c) when the duty is discretionary and not mandatory; 
(d) to enforce a contractual obligation; 
(e) against the president of India or the state governors; and 
(f) against the chief justice of a high court acting in judicial capacity.

Prohibition:
Literally, it means ‘to forbid’. It is issued by a higher court to a lower court or tribunal to prevent the latter from exceeding its jurisdiction or usurping a jurisdiction that it does not possess. Thus, unlike mandamus that directs activity, the prohibition directs inactivity. 
The writ of prohibition can be issued only against judicial and quasijudicial authorities. It is not available against administrative authorities, legislative bodies, and private individuals or bodies.

Certiorari:
In the literal sense, it means ‘to be certified’ or ‘to be informed’. It is issued by a higher court to a lower court or tribunal either to transfer a case pending with the latter to itself or to squash the order of the latter
in a case. It is issued on the grounds of excess of jurisdiction or lack of jurisdiction or error of law. Thus, unlike prohibition, which is only preventive, certiorari is both preventive as well as curative. Previously, the writ of certiorari could be issued only against judicial and quasi-judicial authorities and not against administrative authorities. However, in 1991, the Supreme Court ruled that the certiorari can be issued even against administrative authorities affecting rights of individuals. Like prohibition, certiorari is also not available against legislative bodies and private individuals or bodies.

Quo-Warranto:
In the literal sense, it means ‘by what authority or warrant’. It is issued by the court to enquire into the legality of claim of a person to a public office. Hence, it prevents illegal usurpation of public office by a person. The writ can be issued only in case of a substantive public office of a permanent character created by a statute or by the Constitution. It cannot be issued in cases of ministerial office or private office.
Unlike the other four writs, this can be sought by any interested person and not necessarily by the aggrieved person. 

ARMED FORCES AND FUNDAMENTAL RIGHTS:
Article 33 empowers the Parliament to restrict or abrogate the fundamental rights of the members of armed forces, para-military forces, police forces, intelligence agencies and analogous forces. The objective of this provision is to ensure the proper discharge of their duties and the maintenance of discipline among them. The power to make laws under Article 33 is conferred only on Parliament and not on state legislatures. Any such law made by Parliament cannot be challenged in any court on the ground of contravention of any of the fundamental rights. Accordingly, the Parliament has enacted the Army Act (1950), the Navy Act (1950), the Air Force Act (1950), the Police Forces (Restriction of Rights) Act, 1966, the Border Security Force Act and so on. These impose restrictions on their freedom of speech, right to form associations, right to be members of trade unions or political associations, right to communicate with the press, right to attend public meetings or demonstrations, etc.

The expression‘members of the armed forces’ also covers such employees of the armed forces as barbers, carpenters, mechanics, cooks, chowkidars, bootmakers, tailors who are non-combatants. A parliamentary law enacted under Article 33 can also exclude the court martial (tribunals established under the military law) from the writ jurisdiction of the Supreme Court and the high courts, so far as the enforcement of Fundamental Rights is concerned.

MARTIAL LAW AND FUNDAMENTAL RIGHTS:
Article 34 provides for the restrictions on fundamental rights while martial law is in force in any area within the territory of India. It empowers the Parliament to indemnify any government servant or any other person for any act done by him in connection with the maintenance or restoration of order in any area where martial law was in force. The Parliament can also validate any sentence passed, punishment inflicted, forfeiture ordered or other act done under martial law in such area. The Act of Indemnity made by the Parliament cannot be challenged in any court on the ground of contravention of any of the fundamental rights.
The concept of martial law has been borrowed in India from the English common law. However, the expression ‘martial law’ has not been defined anywhere in the Constitution. Literally, it means ‘military rule’. It refers to a situation where civil administration is run by the military authorities according to their own rules and regulations framed outside the ordinary law. It thus imply the suspension of ordinary law
and the government by military tribunals. It is different from the military law that is applicable to the armed forces. 
There is also no specific or express provision in the Constitution that authorises the executive to declare martial law. However, it is implicit in Article 34 under which martial law can be declared in any area within the territory of India. The martial law is imposed under the extraordinary circumstances like war, invasion, insurrection, rebellion, riot or any violent resistance to law. Its justification is to repel force by force for maintaining or restoring order in the society. During the operation of martial law, the military authorities are vested with abnormal powers to take all necessary steps. They impose restrictions and regulations on the rights of the civilians, can punish the civilians and even condemn them to death. The Supreme Court held that the declaration of martial law does not ipso facto result in the suspension of the writ of habeas corpus. The declaration of a martial law under Article 34 is different from the declaration of a national emergency under Article 352.

EFFECTING CERTAIN FUNDAMENTAL RIGHTS:
Article 35 lays down that the power to make laws, to give effect to certain specified fundamental rights shall vest only in the Parliament and not in the state legislatures. This provision ensures that there is uniformity throughout India with regard to the nature of those fundamental rights and punishment for their infringement. In this direction, Article 35 contains the following provisions:
1. The Parliament shall have (and the legislature of a state shall not have) power to make laws with respect to the following matters:
(a) Prescribing residence as a condition for certain employments or appointments in a state or union territory or local authority or other authority (Article 16).
(b) Empowering courts other than the Supreme Court and the high courts to issue directions, orders and writs of all kinds for the enforcement of fundamental rights (Article 32).
(c) Restricting or abrogating the application of Fundamental Rights to members of armed forces, police forces, etc. (Article 33).
(d) Indemnifying any government servant or any other person for any act done during the operation of martial law in any area (Article 34).

2. Parliament shall have (and the legislature of a state shall not have) powers to make laws for prescribing punishment for those acts that are declared to be offences under the fundamental rights. These include the following:
(a) Untouchability (Article 17).
(b) Traffic in human beings and forced labour (Article 23).
Further, the Parliament shall, after the commencement of the Constitution, make laws for prescribing punishment for the above acts, thus making it obligatory on the part of the Parliament to enact such
laws. 

3. Any law in force at the commencement of the Constitution with respect to any of the matters specified above is to continue in force until altered or repealed or amended by the Parliament. It should be noted that Article 35 extends the competence of the Parliament to make a law on the matters specified above, even though some of those matters may fall within the sphere of the state legislatures (i.e., State List).

PRESENT POSITION OF RIGHT TO PROPERTY:
Originally, the right to property was one of the seven fundamental rights under Part III of the Constitution. It was dealt by Article 19(1) (f) and Article 31. Article 19(1)(f) guaranteed to every citizen the right to acquire, hold and dispose of property. Article 31, on the other hand, guaranteed to every person, whether citizen or non-citizen, right against deprivation of his property. It provided that no person shall be deprived of his property except by authority of law. It empowered the State to acquire or requisition the property of a person on two conditions: 
(a) it should be for public purpose, and 
(b) it should provide for payment of compensation (amount) to the owner.

Since the commencement of the Constitution, the Fundamental Right to Property has been the most controversial. It has caused confrontations between the Supreme Court and the Parliament. It has led to a number of Constitutional amendments, that is, 1st, 4th, 7th, 25th, 39th, 40th and 42nd Amendments. Through these amendments, Articles 31A, 31B and 31C have been added and modified from time to time to nullify the effect of Supreme Court judgements and to protect certain laws from being challenged on the grounds of contravention of Fundamental Rights. Most of the litigation centred around the obligation of the state to pay compensation for acquisition or requisition of private property.
Therefore, the 44th Amendment Act of 1978 abolished the right to property as a Fundamental Right by repealing Article 19(1) (f) and Article 31 from Part III. Instead, the Act inserted a new Article 300A in Part XII under the heading ‘Right to Property’. It provides that no person shall be deprived of his property except by authority of law. Thus, the right to property still remains a legal right or a constitutional right, though no longer a fundamental right. It is not a part of the basic structure of the Constitution. The right to property as a legal right (as distinct from the Fundamental Rights) has the following implications:
(a) It can be regulated ie, curtailed, abridged or modified without constitutional amend-ment by an ordinary law of the Parliament.
(b) It protects private property against executive action but not against legislative action.
(c) In case of violation, the aggrieved person cannot directly move the Supreme Court under Article 32 (right to constitutional remedies including writs) for its enforcement. He can move the High Court under Article 226.
(d) No guaranteed right to compensation in case of acquisition or requisition of the private property by the state.

Though the Fundamental Right to Property under Part III has been abolished, the Part III still carries two provisions which provide for the guaranteed right to compensation in case of acquisition or requisition
of the private property by the state. These two cases where compensation has to be paid are:
(a) When the State acquires the property of a minority educational institution (Article 30); and
(b) When the State acquires the land held by a person under his personal cultivation and the land is within the statutory ceiling limits (Article 31 A).
The first provision was added by the 44th Amendment Act (1978), while the second provision was added by the 17th Amendment Act (1964). Further, Articles 31A, 31B and 31C have been retained as
exceptions to the fundamental rights.

EXCEPTIONS TO FUNDAMENTAL RIGHTS:
1. Saving of Laws Providing for Acquisition of Estates, etc.:
Article 31A saves five categories of laws from being challenged and invalidated on the ground of contravention of the fundamental rights conferred by Article 14 (equality before law and equal protection of
laws) and Article 19 (protection of six rights in respect of speech, assembly, movement, etc.). They are related to agricultural land reforms, industry and commerce and include the following:
(a) Acquisition of estates17 and related rights by the State;
(b) Taking over the management of properties by the State;
(c) Amalgamation of corporations;
(d) Extinguishment or modification of rights of directors or shareholders of corporations; and
(e) Extinguishment or modification of mining leases.
Article 31A does not immunise a state law from judicial review unless it has been reserved for the president’s consideration and has received his assent. This Article also provides for the payment of compensation at market value when the state acquires the land held by a person under his personal cultivation and the land is within the statutory ceiling limit.

2. Validation of Certain Acts and Regulations:
Article 31B saves the acts and regulations included in the Ninth Schedule18 from being challenged and invalidated on the ground of contravention of any of the fundamental rights. Thus, the scope of Article 31B is wider than Article 31A. Article 31B immunises any law included in the Ninth Schedule from all the fundamental rights whether or not the law falls under any of the five categories specified in Article 31A.
However, in a significant judgement delivered in I.R. Coelho case (2007), the Supreme Court ruled that there could not be any blanket immunity from judicial review of laws included in the Ninth Schedule. The court held that judicial review is a ‘basic feature’ of the constitution and it could not be taken away by putting a law under the Ninth Schedule. It said that the laws placed under the Ninth Schedule after April 24, 1973, are open to challenge in court if they violated fundamentals rights guaranteed under Articles 14, 15, 19 and 21 or the ‘basic structure’ of the constitution. It was on April 24, 1973, that
the Supreme Court first propounded the doctrine of ‘basic structure’ or ‘basic features’ of the constitution in its landmark verdict in the Kesavananda Bharati Case.

Originally (in 1951), the Ninth Schedule contained only 13 acts and regulations but at present (in 2016) their number is 282. Of these, the acts and regulations of the state legislature deal with land reforms
and abolition of the zamindari system and that of the Parliament deal with other matters.

3. Saving of Laws Giving Effect to Certain Directive Principles:
Article 31C, as inserted by the 25th Amendment Act of 1971, contained the following two provisions: 
(a) No law that seeks to implement the socialistic directive principles specified in Article 39(b)21 or (c)22 shall be void on the ground of contravention of the fundamental rights conferred by Article 14 (equality before law and equal protection of laws) or Article 19 (protection of six rights in respect of speech, assembly, movement, etc.)
(b) No law containing a declaration that it is for giving effect to such policy shall be questioned in any court on the ground that it does not give effect to such a policy.

In the Kesavananda Bharati case23 (1973), the Supreme Court declared the above second provision of Article 31C as unconstitutional and invalid on the ground that judicial review is a basic feature of the Constitution and hence, cannot be taken away. However, the above first provision of Article 31C was held to be constitutional and valid. The 42nd Amendment Act (1976) extended the scope of the above first provision of Article 31C by including within its protection any law to implement any of the directive principles specified in Part IV of the Constitution and not merely in Article 39 (b) or (c). However, this extention was declared as unconstitutional and invalid by the Supreme Court in the Minerva Mills case24 (1980).

CRITICISM OF FUNDAMENTAL RIGHTS:
The Fundamental Rights enshrined in Part III of the Constitution have met with a wide and varied criticism. The arguments of the critics are:
1. Excessive Limitations:
They are subjected to innumerable exceptions, restrictions, qualifications and explanations. Hence, the critics remarked that the Constitution grants Fundamental Rights with one hand and takes them
away with the other. Jaspat Roy Kapoor went to the extent of saying that the chapter dealing with the fundamental rights should be renamed as ‘Limitaions on Fundamental Rights’ or ‘Fundamental Rights and Limitations Thereon’.

2. No Social and Economic Rights:
The list is not comprehensive as it mainly consists of political rights. It makes no provision for important social and economic rights like right to social security, right to work, right to employment, right to rest and leisure and so on. These rights are made available to the citizens of advanced democratic countries. Also, the socialistic constitutions of erstwhile USSR or China provided for such rights. 

3. No Clarity:
They are stated in a vague, indefinite and ambiguous manner. The various phrases and words used in the chapter like ‘public order’, ‘minorities’, ‘reasonable restriction’, ‘public interest’ and so on are not
clearly defined. The language used to describe them is very complicated and beyond the comprehension of the common man. It is alleged that the Constitution was made by the lawyers for the lawyers.
Sir Ivor Jennings called the Constitution of India a ‘paradise for lawyers’.

4. No Permanency:
They are not sacrosanct or immutable as the Parliament can curtail or abolish them, as for example, the abolition of the fundamental right to property in 1978. Hence, they can become a play tool in the hands of politicians having majority support in the Parliament. The judicially innovated ‘doctrine of basic structure’ is the only limitation on the authority of Parliament to curtail or abolish the fundamental right.

5. Suspension During Emergency:
The suspension of their enforcement during the operation of National Emergency (except Articles 20 and 21) is another blot on the efficacy of these rights. This provision cuts at the roots of democratic system in the country by placing the rights of the millions of innocent people in continuous jeopardy. According to the critics, the Fundamental Rights should be enjoyable in all situations–Emergency or no Emergency.

6. Expensive Remedy:
The judiciary has been made responsible for defending and protecting these rights against the interference of the legislatures and executives. However, the judicial process is too expensive and hinders
the common man from getting his rights enforced through the courts. Hence, the critics say that the rights benefit mainly the rich section of the Indian Society.

7. Preventive Detention:
The critics assert that the provision for preventive detention (Article 22) takes away the spirit and substance of the chapter on fundamental rights. It confers arbitrary powers on the State and negates individual liberty. It justifies the criticism that the Constitution of India deals more with the rights of the State against the individual than with the rights of the individual against the State. Notably, no democratic country in the world has made preventive detention as an integral part of their Constitutions as has been made in India.

8. No Consistent Philosophy:
According to some critics, the chapter on fundamental rights is not the product of any philosophical principle. Sir Ivor Jennings expressed this view when he said that the Fundamental Rights proclaimed by the Indian Constitution are based on no consistent philosophy. The critics say that this creates difficulty for the Supreme Court and the high courts in interpreting the fundamental rights.

SIGNIFICANCE OF FUNDAMENTAL RIGHTS:
In spite of the above criticism and shortcomings, the Fundamental Rights are significant in the following respects: 
1. They constitute the bedrock of democratic system in the country.
2. They provide necessary conditions for the material and moral protection of man.
3. They serve as a formidable bulwark of individual liberty.
4. They facilitate the establishment of rule of law in the country.
5. They protect the interests of minorities and weaker sections of society.
6. They strengthen the secular fabric of the Indian State.
7. They check the absoluteness of the authority of the government.
8. They lay down the foundation stone of social equality and social justice.
9. They ensure the dignity and respect of individuals.
10. They facilitate the participation of people in the political and administrative process.

RIGHTS OUTSIDE PART III:
Besides the Fundamental Rights included in Part III, there are certain other rights contained in other parts of the Constitution. These rights are known as constitutional rights or legal rights or non-fundamental
rights. They are:
1. No tax shall be levied or collected except by authority of law (Article 265 in Part XII).
2. No person shall be deprived of his property save by authority of law (Article 300-A in Part XII).
3. Trade, commerce and intercourse throughout the territory of India shall be free (Article 301 in Part XIII).

Even though the above rights are also equally justiciable, they are different from the Fundamental Rights. In case of violation of a Fundamental Right, the aggrieved person can directly move the Supreme Court for its enforcement under Article 32, which is in itself a fundamental right. But, in case of violation of the above rights, the aggrieved person cannot avail this constitutional remedy. He can move the High Court by an ordinary suit or under Article 226 (writ jurisdiction of high court).


Directive Principles of State Policy:
The Directive Principles of State Policy are enumerated in Part IV of the Constitution from Articles 36 to 51. The framers of the Constitution borrowed this idea from the Irish Constitution of 1937, which had copied it from the Spanish Constitution. Dr. B.R. Ambedkar described these principles as ‘novel features’ of the Indian Constitution. The Directive Principles along with the Fundamental Rights contain the philosophy of the Constitution and is the soul of the Constitution. Granville Austin has described the Directive Principles and the Fundamental Rights as the ‘Conscience of the Constitution’.

FEATURES OF THE DIRECTIVE PRINCIPLES:
1. The phrase ‘Directive Principles of State Policy’ denotes the ideals that the State should keep in mind while formulating policies and enacting laws. These are the constitutional instructions or recommendations to the State in legislative, executive and administrative matters. According to Article 36, the term ‘State’ in Part IV has the same meaning as in Part III dealing with Fundamental Rights. Therefore, it includes the legislative and executive organs of the central and state governments, all local authorities and all other public authorities in the country.

2. The Directive Principles resemble the ‘Instrument of Instructions’ enumerated in the Government of India Act of 1935. In the words of Dr. B.R. Ambedkar, ‘the Directive Principles are like the instrument of instructions, which were issued to the Governor-General and to the Governors of the colonies of India by the British Government under the Government of India Act of 1935. What is called Directive Principles is merely another name for the instrument of instructions. The only difference is that they are instructions to the legislature and the executive’.

3. The Directive Principles constitute a very comprehensive economic, social and political programme for a modern democratic State. They aim at realising the high ideals of justice, liberty, equality and fraternity as outlined in the Preamble to the Constitution. They embody the concept of a ‘welfare state’ and not that of a ‘police state’, which existed during the colonial era3. In brief, they seek to establish economic and social democracy in the country. 

4. The Directive Principles are non-justiciable in nature, that is, they are not legally enforceable by the courts for their violation. Therefore, the government (Central, state and local) cannot be compelled to implement them. Nevertheless, the Constitution (Article 37) itself says that these principles are fundamental in the governance of the country and it shall be the duty of the State to apply these principles in making laws.

5. The Directive Principles, though non-justiciable in nature, help the courts in examining and determining the constitutional validity of a law. The Supreme Court has ruled many a times that in determining the constitutionality of any law, if a court finds that the law in question seeks to give effect to a Directive Principle, it may consider such law to be  ‘reasonable’ in relation to Article 14 (equality before law) or
Article 19 (six freedoms) and thus save such law from unconstitutionality.

CLASSIFICATION OF THE DIRECTIVE PRINCIPLES:
The Constitution does not contain any classification of Directive Principles. However, on the basis of their content and direction, they can be classified into three broad categories, viz, socialistic, Gandhian and liberal-intellectual.

Socialistic Principles:
These principles reflect the ideology of socialism. They lay down the framework of a democratic socialist state, aim at providing social and economic justice, and set the path towards welfare state. They direct the state:
1. To promote the welfare of the people by securing a social order permeated by justice–social, economic and political– and to minimise inequalities in income, status, facilities and opportuni-ties4 (Article 38).
2. To secure 
(a) the right to adequate means of livelihood for all citizens; 
(b) the equitable distribution of material resources of the community for the common good; 
(c) prevention of concentration of wealth and means of production; 
(d) equal pay for equal work for men and women; 
(e) preservation of the health and strength of workers and children against
forcible abuse; and 
(f) opportunities for healthy development of children5 (Article 39).
3. To promote equal justice and to provide free legal aid to the poor (Article 39 A).
4. To secure the right to work, to education and to public assistance in cases of unemployment, old age, sickness and disablement (Article 41).
5. To make provision for just and humane conditions of work and maternity relief (Article 42).
6. To secure a living wage, a decent standard of life and social and cultural opportunities for all workers (Article 43).
7. To take steps to secure the participation of workers in the management of indus-tries (Article 43 A).
8. To raise the level of nutrition and the standard of living of people and to improve public health (Article 47).

Gandhian Principles:
These principles are based on Gandhian ideology. They represent the programme of reconstruction enunciated by Gandhi during the national movement. In order to fulfil the dreams of Gandhi, some
of his ideas were included as Directive Principles. They require the State: 
1. To organise village panchayats and endow them with necessary powers and authority to enable them to function as units of self-government (Article 40).
2. To promote cottage industries on an individual or cooperation basis in rural areas (Article 43).
3. To promote voluntary formation, autonomous functioning, democratic control and professional management of cooperative societies8a (Article 43B).
4. To promote the educational and economic interests of SCs, STs, and other weaker sections of the society and to protect them from social injustice and exploitation (Article 46).
5. To prohibit the consumption of intoxicating drinks and drugs which are injurious to health (Article 47).
6. To prohibit the slaughter of cows, calves and other milch and draught cattle and to improve their breeds (Article 48).

Liberal-Intellectual Principles:
The principles included in this category represent the ideology of liberalism. They direct the state:
1. To secure for all citizens a uniform civil code throughout the country (Article 44).
2. To provide early childhood care and education for all children until they complete the age of six years (Article 45).
3. To organise agriculture and animal husbandry on modern and scientific lines (Article 48).
4. To protect and improve the environment and to safeguard forests and wild life (Article 48 A).
5. To protect monuments, places and objects of artistic or historic interest which are declared to be of national importance (Article 49).
6. To separate the judiciary from the executive in the public services of the State (Article 50).
7. To promote international peace and security and maintain just and honourable relations between nations; to foster respect for international law and treaty obligations, and to encourage settlement of international disputes by arbitration (Article 51).

NEW DIRECTIVE PRINCIPLES:
The 42nd Amendment Act of 1976 added four new Directive Principles to the original list. They require the State:
1. To secure opportunities for healthy development of children (Article 39).
2. To promote equal justice and to provide free legal aid to the poor (Article 39 A).
3. To take steps to secure the participation of workers in the management of industries (Article 43 A).
4. To protect and improve the environment and to safeguard forests and wild life (Article 48 A).

The 44th Amendment Act of 1978 added one more Directive Principle, which requires the State to minimise inequalities in income, status, facilities and opportunities (Article 38). 
The 86th Amendment Act of 2002 changed the subject-matter of Article 45 and made elementary education a fundamental right under Article 21 A. The amended directive requires the State to provide early childhood care and education for all children until they complete the age of six years. 
The 97th Amendment Act of 2011 added a new Directive Principle relating to cooperative societies. It requires the state to promote voluntary formation, autonomous functioning, democratic control and professional management of co-operative societies (Article 43B).

SANCTION BEHIND DIRECTIVE PRINCIPLES:
Sir B.N. Rau, the Constitutional Advisor to the Constituent Assembly, recommended that the rights of an individual should be divided into two categories–justiciable and non-justiciable, which was accepted by the Drafting Committee. Consequently, the Fundamental Rights, which are justiciable in nature, are incorporated in Part III and the Directive Principles, which are nonjusticiable in nature, are incorporated in Part IV of the Constitution.
Though the Directive Principles are non-justiciable, the Constitution (Article 37) makes it clear that ‘these principles are fundamental in the governance of the country and it shall be the duty of the state to apply these principles in making laws’. Thus, they impose a moral obligation on the state authorities for their application, but the real force behind them is political, that is, public opinion. As observed by Alladi Krishna Swamy Ayyar, ‘no ministry responsible to the people can afford light-heartedly to ignore the provisions in Part IV of the Constitution’. 
Similarly, Dr. B.R. Ambedkar said in the Constituent Assembly that ‘a government which rests on popular vote can hardly ignore the Directive Principles while shaping its policy. If any government ignores them, it will certainly have to answer for that before the electorate at the election time’.

The framers of the Constitution made the Directive Principles non-justiciable and legally non-enforceable because:
1. The country did not possess sufficient financial resources to implement them.
2. The presence of vast diversity and backwardness in the country would stand in the way of their implementation.
3. The newly born independent Indian State with its many preoccupations might be crushed under the burden unless it was free to decide the order, the time, the place and the
mode of fulfilling them. ‘The Constitution makers, therefore, taking a pragmatic view,  refrained from giving teeth to these principles. They believed more in an awakened public opinion rather than in court procedures as the ultimate sanction for the fulfilment of these principles’.

CRITICISM OF THE DIRECTIVE PRINCIPLES:
The Directive Principles of State Policy have been criticised by some members of the Constituent Assembly as well as other constitutional and political experts on the following grounds:
1. No Legal Force:
The Directives have been criticised mainly because of their nonjusticiable character. While K.T. Shah dubbed them as ‘pious superfluities’ and compared them with ‘a cheque on a bank, payable only when the resources of the bank permit’, Nasiruddin contended that these principles are ‘no better than the new year’s resolutions, which are broken on the second of January’. Even as T.T. Krishnamachari described the Directives as ‘a veritable dustbin of sentiments’, K C Wheare called them as a ‘manifesto of aims and aspirations’ and opined that they serve as mere ‘moral homily’, and Sir Ivor Jennings thought they are only as ‘pious aspirations’.

2. Illogically Arranged:
Critics opine that the Directives are not arranged in a logical manner based on a consistent philosophy. According to N Srinivasan, ‘the Directives are neither properly classified nor logically arranged. The declaration mixes up relatively unimportant issues with the most vital economic and social questions. It combines rather incongruously the modern with the old and provisions suggested by the reason and science with provisions based purely on sentiment and prejudice’. Sir Ivor Jennings too pointed out that these principles have no consistent philosophy.

3. Conservative:
According to Sir Ivor Jennings, the Directives are based on the political philosophy of the 19th century England. He remarked: ‘The ghosts of Sydney Webb and Beatrice Webb stalk through the pages of the text. Part IV of the Constitution expresses Fabian Socialism without the socialism’. He opined that the Directives ‘are deemed to be suitable in India in the middle of the twentieth century. The question whether they are suitable for the twenty-first century cannot be answered; but it is quite probable that they will be entirely out moded.

4. Constitutional Conflict:
K Santhanam has pointed out that the Directives lead to a constitutional conflict 
(a) between the Centre and the states, 
(b) between the President and the Prime Minister, and 
(c) between the governor and the chief minister. 
According to him, the Centre can give directions to the states with regard to the implementation of these principles, and in case of non-compliance, can dismiss the state government. Similarly, when the Prime Minister gets a bill (which violates the Directive Principles) passed by the Parliament, the president may reject the bill on the ground that these principles are fundamental to the governance of the country and hence, the ministry has no right to ignore them. The same constitutional conflict may occur between the governor and the chief minister at the state level.

UTILITY OF DIRECTIVE PRINCIPLES:
In spite of the above criticisms and shortcomings, the Directive Principles are not an unnecessary appendage to the Constitution. The Constitution itself declares that they are fundamental to the
governance of the country. 

According to L.M. Singhvi, an eminent jurist and diplomat, ‘the Directives are the life giving provisions of the Constitution. They constitute the stuff of the Constitution and its philosophy of social justice’. M.C. Chagla, former Chief Justice of India, is of the opinion that, ‘if all these principles are fully carried out, our country would indeed be a heaven on earth. India would then be not only democracy in the political sense, but also a welfare state looking after the welfare of its citizens’.

Dr. B.R. Ambedkar had pointed out that the Directives have great value because they lay down that the goal of Indian polity is ‘economic democracy’ as distinguished from ‘political democracy’. Granville Austin opined that the Directive Principles are ‘aimed at furthering the goals of the social revolution or to foster this  revolution by establishing the conditions necessary for its achivement’. 

Sir B.N. Rau, the constitutional advisor to the Constituent Assembly, stated that the Directive Principles are intended as ‘moral precepts for the authorities of the state. They have at least an educative value.’
According to M.C. Setalvad, the former Attorney General of India, the Directive Principles, although confer no legal rights and create no legal remedies, are significant and useful in the following ways:
1. They are like an ‘Instrument of Instructions’ or general recommendations addressed to all authorities in the Indian Union. They remind them of the basic principles of the new social and economic order, which the Constitution aims at building.
2. They have served as useful beacon- lights to the courts. They have helped the courts in exercising their power of judicial review, that is, the power to determine the constitutional validity of a law.
3. They form the dominating background to all State action, legislative or executive and also a guide to the courts in some respects.
4. They amplify the Preamble, which solemnly resolves to secure to all citizens of India justice, liberty, equality and fraternity.

The Directives also play the following roles:
1. They facilitate stability and continuity in domestic and foreign policies in political, economic and social spheres in spite of the changes of the party in power.
2. They are supplementary to the fundamental rights of the citizens. They are intended to fill in the vacuum in Part III by providing for social and economic rights.
3. Their implementation creates a favourable atmosphere for the full and proper enjoyment of the fundamental rights by the citizens. Political democracy, without economic democracy, has no meaning.
4. They enable the opposition to exercise influence and control over the operations of the government. The Opposition can blame the ruling party on the ground that its activities are opposed to the Directives. 
5. They serve as a crucial test for the performance of the government. The people can examine the policies and  programmes of the government in the light of these constitutional declarations.
6. They serve as common political manifesto. ‘A ruling party, irrespective of its political ideology, has to recognise the fact that these principles are intended to be its guide, philosopher and friend in its legislative and executive acts’.

CONFLICT BETWEEN FUNDAMENTAL RIGHTS AND DIRECTIVE PRINCIPLES:
The justiciability of Fundamental Rights and non-justiciability of Directive Principles on the one hand and the moral obligation of State to implement Directive Principles (Article 37) on the other hand have led to a conflict between the two since the commencement of the Constitution. 
In the Champakam Dorairajan case20 (1951), the Supreme Court ruled that in case of any conflict between the Fundamental Rights and the Directive Principles, the former would prevail. It declared that the Directive Principles have to conform to and run as subsidiary to the Fundamental Rights. But, it also held that the Fundamental Rights could be amended by the Parliament by enacting constitutional
amendment acts. As a result, the Parliament made the First Amendment Act (1951), the Fourth Amendment Act (1955) and the Seventeenth Amendment Act (1964) to implement some of the Directives.

The above situation underwent a major change in 1967 following the Supreme Court’s judgement in the Golaknath case (1967). In that case, the Supreme Court ruled that the Parliament cannot take away or abridge any of the Fundamental Rights, which are ‘sacrosanct’ in nature. In other words, the Court held that the Fundamental Rights cannot be amended for the implementation of the Directive Principles.
The Parliament reacted to the Supreme Court’s judgement in the Golaknath Case (1967) by enacting the 24th Amendment Act (1971) and the 25th Amendment Act (1971). The 24th Amendment Act declared that the Parliament has the power to abridge or take away any of the Fundamental Rights by enacting Constitutional Amendment Acts. The 25th Amendment Act inserted a new Article 31C which contained the following two provisions:
1. No law which seeks to implement the socialistic Directive Principles specified in Article 39 (b)22 and (c)23 shall be void on the ground of contravention of the Fundamental Rights conferred by Article 14 (equality before law and equal protection of laws), Article 19 (protection of six rights in respect of speech, assembly, movement, etc) or Article 31 (right to property).
2. No law containing a declaration for giving effect to such policy shall be questioned in any court on the ground that it does not give effect to such a policy.

In the Kesavananda Bharati case24 (1973), the Supreme Court  declared the above second provision of Article 31C as unconstitutional and invalid on the ground that judicial review is a basic feature of the Constitution and hence, cannot be taken away. However, the above first provision of Article 31C was held to be constitutional and valid. 

Later, the 42nd Amendment Act (1976) extended the scope of the above first provision of Article 31C by including within its protection any law to implement any of the Directive Principles and not merely those specified in Article 39 (b) and (c). In other words, the 42nd Amendment Act accorded the position of legal primacy and supremacy to the Directive Principles over the Fundamental Rights conferred by Articles 14, 19 and 31. However, this extension was declared as unconstitutional and invalid by the Supreme Court in the Minerva Mills case25 (1980). It means that the Directive Principles were once again made subordinate to the Fundamental Rights. But the Fundamental Rights conferred by Article 14 and Article 19 were accepted as subordinate to the Directive Principles specified in Article 39 (b) and (c). 
Further, Article 31 (right to property) was abolished by the 44th Amendment Act (1978). 

In the Minerva Mills case (1980), the Supreme Court also held that ‘the Indian Constitution is founded on the bedrock of the balance between the Fundamental Rights and the Directive Principles. They together constitute the core of commitment to social revolution. They are like two wheels of a chariot, one no less than the other. To give absolute primacy to one over the other is to disturb the harmony of the Constitution. This harmony and balance between the two is an essential feature of the basic structure of the Constitution. The goals set out by the Directive Principles have to be achieved without the abrogation of the means provided by the Fundamental Rights’.

Therefore, the present position is that the Fundamental Rights enjoy supremacy over the Directive Principles. Yet, this does not mean that the Directive Principles cannot be implemented. The Parliament can amend the Fundamental Rights for implementing the Directive Principles, so long as the amendment does not damage or destroy the basic structure of the Constitution.

IMPLEMENTATION OF DIRECTIVE PRINCIPLES:
Since 1950, the successive governments at the Centre and in the states have made several laws and formulated various programmes for implementing the Directive Principles. These are mentioned below:
1. The Planning Commission was established in 1950 to take up the development of the country in a planned manner. The successive Five Year Plans aimed at securing socioeconomic justice and reducing inequalities of income, status and opportunities. In 2015, the Planning Commission was replaced by a new body called NITI Aayog (National Institution for Transforming India).
2. Almost all the states have passed land reform laws to bring changes in the agrarian society and to improve the conditions of the rural masses. These measures include: 
(a) abolition of intermediaries like zamindars, jagirdars,
inamdars, etc; 
(b) tenancy reforms like security of tenure, fair rents, etc; 
(c) imposition of ceilings on land holdings; 
(d) distribution of surplus land among the landless labourers; and 
(e) cooperative farming.

3. The Minimum Wages Act (1948), the Payment of Wages Act (1936), the Payment of Bonus Act (1965), the Contract Labour Regulation and Abolition Act (1970), the Child Labour Prohibition and Regulation Act (1986), the Bonded Labour System Abolition Act (1976), the Trade Unions Act (1926), the Factories Act (1948), the Mines Act (1952), the Industrial Disputes Act (1947), the Workmen’s
Compensation Act (1923) and so on have been enacted to protect the interests of the labour sections. In 2006, the government banned the child labour. In 2016, the Child Labour Prohibition and Regulation Act (1986) was renamed as the Child and Adolescent Labour Prohibition and Regulation Act, 1986. 

4. The Maternity Benefit Act (1961) and the Equal Remuneration Act (1976) have been made to protect the interests of women workers.

5. Various measures have been taken to utilise the financial resources for promoting the common good.These include nationalisation of life insurance (1956), the nationalisation of fourteen leading commercial banks (1969), nationalisation of general insurance (1971), abolition of Privy Purses (1971) and so on.

6. The Legal Services Authorities Act (1987) has established a nation-wide network to provide free and competent legal aid to the poor and to organise lok adalat for promoting equal justice. Lok adalat is a statutory forum for conciliatory settlement of legal disputes. It has been given the status of a civil court. Its awards are enforceable, binding on the parties and final as no appeal lies before any court against them.

7. Khadi and Village Industries Board, Khadi and Village Industries Commission, Small-Scale Industries Board, National Small Industries Corporation, Handloom Board, Handicrafts Board, Coir Board, Silk Board and so on have been set up for the development of cottage industries in rural areas.

8. The Community Development Programme (1952), Hill Area Development Programme (1960), Drought-Prone Area Programme (1973), Minimum Needs Programme (1974), Integrated Rural Development Programme (1978), Jawahar Rozgar Yojana (1989), Swarnajayanti Gram Swarozgar Yojana (1999), Sampoorna Grameena Rozgar Yojana (2001), National Rural Employment Guarantee Programme
(2006) and so on have been launched for raising the standard of living of people. 

9. The Wildlife (Protection) Act, 1972 and the Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980, have been enacted to safeguard the wildlife and the forests respectively. Further, the Water and Air Acts have provided for the establishment of the Central and State Pollution Control Boards, which are engaged in the protection and improvement of environment. The National Forest Policy (1988) aims at the protection, conservation and development of forests. 

10. Agriculture has been modernised by providing improvedagricultural inputs, seeds, fertilisers and irrigation facilities. Various steps have also been taken to organise animal husbandry on modern and scientific lines. 

11. Three-tier panchayati raj system (at village, taluka and zila levels) has been introduced to translate into reality Gandhiji’s dream of every village being a republic. The 73rd Amendment Act (1992) has been enacted to provide constitutional status and protection to these panchayati raj institutions.

12. Seats are reserved for SCs, STs and other weaker sections in educational institutions, government services and representative bodies. The Untouchability (Offences) Act, 1955, which was renamed as the Protection of Civil Rights Act in 1976 and the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes (Prevention of Atrocities) Act, 1989, have been enacted to protect the SCs and STs from social injustice and exploitation. The 65th Constitutional Amendment Act of 1990 established the National Commission for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes to protect the interests of SCs and STs. Later, the 89th Constitutional Amendment Act of 2003 bifurcated this combined commission into two separate bodies, namely, National Commission for Schedule Castes and National Commission for Schedule Tribes.

Various national-level commissions have been established to promote and protect the social, educational and economic interests of the weaker sections of the society. These include the National Commission for Backward Classes (1993), the National Commission for Minorities (1993), the National Commission for Women (1992) and the National Commission for Protection of Child Rights (2007). 

Further, the 102nd Amendment Act of 2018 conferred a constitutional status on the National Commission for Backward Classes and also enlarged its functions. In 2019, the central government issued orders providing 10% reservation to the Economically Weaker Sections (EWSs) in admission to educational institutions and civil posts and services in the Government of India. The benefit of this reservation can be availed by the persons belonging to EWSs who are not covered under any of the existing schemes of reservations for SCs, STs and OBCs. This reservation was facilitated by the 103rd Amendment Act of 2019.

13. The Criminal Procedure Code (1973) separated the judiciary from the executive in the public services of the state. Prior to this separation, the district authorities like the collector, the sub-divisional officer, the tehsildar and so on used to exercise judicial powers along with the traditional executive powers. After the separation, the judicial powers were taken away from these executive authorities and vested in the hands of district judicial magistrates who work under the direct control of the state high court.

14. The Ancient and Historical Monument and Archaeological Sites and Remains Act (1951) has been enacted to protect the monuments, places and objects of national importance. 

15. Primary health centres and hospitals have been established throughout the country to improve the public health. Also, special programmes have been launched to eradicate widespread diseases like malaria, TB, leprosy, AIDS, cancer, filaria, kala-azar, guineaworm, yaws, Japanese encephalitis and so on.

16. Laws to prohibit the slaughter of cows, calves, and bullocks have been enacted in some states.

17. Some states have initiated the old age pension schemes for people above 65 years.

18. India has been following the policy of non-alignment and panchsheel to promote international peace and security.

In spite of the above steps by the Central and state governments, the Directive Principles have not been implemented  fully and effectively due to several reasons like inadequate financial resources, unfavourable socio-economic conditions, population explosion, strained Centre-state relations and so on.

DIRECTIVES OUTSIDE PART IV:
Apart from the Directives included in Part IV, there are some other Directives contained in other Parts of the Constitution. They are: 
1. Claims of SCs and STs to Services: The claims of the members of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes shall be taken into consideration, consistently with the maintenance of efficiency of administration, in the making of appointments to services and posts in connection with the affairs of the Union or a State (Article 335 in Part XVI).
2. Instruction in mother tongue: It shall be the endeavour of every state and every local authority within the state to provide adequate facilities for instruction in the mothertongue at the primary stage of education to children belonging to linguistic minority groups (Article 350-A in Part XVII).
3. Development of the Hindi Language: It shall be the duty of the Union to promote the spread of the Hindi language and to develop it so that it may serve as a medium of expression for all the elements of the composite culture of India (Article 351 in Part XVII).

The above Directives are also non-jus-ticiable in nature. However, they are also given equal importance and attention by the judiciary on the ground that all parts of the constitution must be read together.

Fundamental Duties:
Though the rights and duties of the citizens are correlative and inseparable, the original constitution contained only the fundamental rights and not the fundamental duties. In other words, the framers of the Constitution did not feel it necessary to incorporate the fundamental duties of the citizens in the Constitution. However, they incorporated the duties of the State in the Constitution in the form of Directive Principles of State Polity. Later in 1976, the fundamental duties of citizens were added in the Constitution. In 2002, one more Fundamental Duty was added.

The Fundamental Duties in the Indian Constitution are inspired by the Constitution of erstwhile USSR. Notably, none of the Constitutions of major democratic countries like USA, Canada, France, Germany, Australia and so on specifically contain a list of duties of citizens. Japanese Constitution is, perhaps, the only democratic Constitution in world which contains a list of duties of citizens. The socialist countries, on the contrary, gave equal importance to the fundamental rights and duties of their citizens. Hence, the Constitution of erstwhile USSR declared that the citizen’s exercise of their rights and freedoms was inseparable from the performance of their duties and obligations.

SWARAN SINGH COMMITTEE RECOMMENDATIONS:
In 1976, the Congress Party set up the Sardar Swaran Singh Committee to make recommendations about fundamental duties, the need and necessity of which was felt during the operation of the internal emergency (1975–1977). The committee recommended the inclusion of a separate chapter on fundamental duties in the Constitution. It stressed that the citizens should become conscious that in addition to the enjoyment of rights, they also have certain duties to perform as well. The Congress Government at Centre accepted these recommendations and enacted the 42nd Constitutional Amendment Act in 1976. This amendment added a new part, namely, Part IVA to the Constitution. This new part consists of only one Article, that is, Article 51A which for the first time specified a code of ten fundamental duties of the citizens. The ruling Congress party declared the non-inclusion of fundamental duties in the Constitution as a historical mistake and claimed that what the framers of the Constitution failed to do was being done now. Though the Swaran Singh Committee suggested the incorporation of eight Fundamental Duties in the Constitution, the 42nd Constitutional Amendment Act (1976) included ten Fundamental Duties.

Interestingly, certain recommendations of the Committee were not accepted by the Congress Party and hence, not incorporated in the Constitution. These include:
1. The Parliament may provide for the imposition of such penalty or punishment as may be considered appropriate for any non-compliance with or refusal to observe any of the duties.
2. No law imposing such penalty or punishment shall be called  in question in any court on the ground of infringement of any of Fundamental Rights or on the ground of repugnancy to any other provision of the Constitution.
3. Duty to pay taxes should also be a Fundamental Duty of the citizens.

LIST OF FUNDAMENTAL DUTIES:
According to Article 51A, it shall be the duty of every citizen of India:
(a) to abide by the Constitution and respect its ideals and institutions, the National Flag and the National Anthem;
(b) to cherish and follow the noble ideals that inspired the national struggle for freedom;
(c) to uphold and protect the sovereignty, unity and integrity of India;
(d) to defend the country and render national service when called upon to do so;
(e) to promote harmony and the spirit of common brotherhood amongst all the people of India transcending religious, linguistic and regional or sectional diversities and to
renounce practices derogatory to the dignity of women; 
(f) to value and preserve the rich heritage of the country’s composite culture;
(g) to protect and improve the natural environment including forests, lakes, rivers and wildlife and to have compassion for living creatures;
(h) to develop scientific temper, humanism and the spirit of inquiry and reform;
(i) to safeguard public property and to abjure violence;
(j) to strive towards excellence in all spheres of individual and collective activity so that the nation constantly rises to higher levels of endeavour and achievement; and
(k) to provide opportunities for education to his child or ward between the age of six and fourteen years. This duty was added by the 86th Constitutional Amendment Act, 2002.

FEATURES OF THE FUNDAMENTAL DUTIES:
Following points can be noted with regard to the characteristics of the Fundamental Duties:
1. Some of them are moral duties while others are civic duties. For instance, cherishing noble ideals of freedom struggle is a moral precept and respecting the Constitution, National Flag and National Anthem is a civic duty.
2. They refer to such values which have been a part of the Indian tradition, mythology, religions and practices. In other words, they essentially contain just a codification of tasks integral to the Indian way of life.
3. Unlike some of the Fundamental Rights which extend to all persons whether citizens or foreigners1 , the Fundamental Duties are confined to citizens only and do not extend to foreigners.
4. Like the Directive Principles, the fundamental duties are also non-justiciable. The Constitution does not provide for their direct enforcement by the courts. Moreover, there is not legal sanction against their violation. However, the Parliament is free to enforce them by suitable legislation.

CRITICISM OF FUNDAMENTAL DUTIES:
The Fundamental Duties mentioned in Part IVA of the Constitution have been criticised on the following grounds: 
1. The list of duties is not exhaustive as it does not cover other important duties like casting vote, paying taxes, family planning and so on. In fact, duty to pay taxes was recommended by the Swaran Singh Committee. 
2. Some of the duties are vague, ambiguous and difficult to be understood by the common man. For example, different interpretations can be given to the phrases like ‘noble ideals’, ‘composite culture’, ‘scientific temper’ and so on.
3. They have been described by the critics as a code of moral precepts due to their non-justiciable character. Interestingly, the Swaran Singh Committee had suggested for penalty or punishment for the non-performance of Fundamental Duties. 
4. Their inclusion in the Constitution was described by the critics as superfluous. This is because the duties included in the Constitution as fundamental would be performed by the people even though they were not incorporated in the Constitution.
5. The critics said that the inclusion of fundamental duties as an appendage to Part IV of the Constitution has reduced their value and significance. They should have been added after Part III so as to keep them on par with Fundamental Rights.

SIGNIFICANCE OF FUNDAMENTAL DUTIES:
In spite of criticisms and opposition, the fundamental duties are considered significant from the following viewpoints:
1. They serve as a reminder to the citizens that while enjoying their rights, they should also be conscious of duties they owe to their country, their society and to their fellow citizens.
2. They serve as a warning against the antinational and antisocial activities like burning the national flag, destroying public property and so on.
3. They serve as a source of inspiration for the citizens and promote a sense of discipline and commitment among them. They create a feeling that the citizens are not mere spectators but active participants in the realisation of national goals.
4. They help the courts in examining and determining the constitutional validity of a law. In 1992, the Supreme Court ruled that in determining the constitutionality of any law, if a court finds that the law in question seeks to give effect to a fundamental duty, it may consider such law to be ‘reasonable’ in relation to Article 14 (equality before law) or Article 19 (six freedoms) and thus save such law from unconstitutionality.
5. They are enforceable by law. Hence, the Parliament can provide for the imposition of appropriate penalty or punishment for failure to fulfil any of them.

H.R. Gokhale, the then Law Minister, gave the following reason for incorporating the fundamental duties in the Constitution after twenty-six years of its inauguration: ‘In post-independent India, particularly on the eve of emergency in June 1975, a section of the people showed no anxiety to fulfil their fundamental obligations of respecting the established legal order ..... the provisions of chapter on fundamental duties would have a sobering effect on these restless spirits who have had a host of anti-national subversive and unconstitutional agitations in the past’.
Indira Gandhi, the then Prime Minister, justified the inclusion of fundamental duties in the Constitution and argued that their inclusion would help to strengthen democracy. She said, ‘the moral value of fundamental duties would be not to smoother rights but to establish a democratic balance by making the people conscious of their duties equally as they are conscious of their rights’.
The Opposition in the Parliament strongly opposed the inclusion of fundamental duties in the Constitution by the Congress government. However, the new Janata Government headed by Morarji Desai in the post-emergency period did not annul the Fundamental Duties. Notably, the new government sought to undo many changes introduced in the Constitution by the 42nd Amendment Act (1976) through the 43rd Amendment Act (1977) and the 44th Amendment Act (1978). This shows that there was an eventual consensus on the necessity and desirability of including the Fundamental Duties in the Constitution. This is more clear with the addition of one more Fundamental Duty in 2002 by the 86th Amendment Act.

VERMA COMMITTEE OBSERVATIONS:
The Verma Committee on Fundamental Duties of the Citizens (1999) identified the existence of legal provisions for the implementation of some of the Fundamental Duties. They are mentioned below:
1. The Prevention of Insults to National Honour Act (1971) prevents disrespect to the Constitution of India, the National Flag and the National Anthem.
2. The various criminal laws in force provide for punishments for encouraging enmity between different sections of people on grounds of language, race, place of birth, religion and so on.
3. The Protection of Civil Rights Act4 (1955) provides for punishments for offences related to caste and religion. 
4. The Indian Penal Code (IPC) declares the imputations and assertions prejudicial to national integration as punishable offences.
5. The Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act of 1967 provides for the declaration of a communal organisation as an unlawful association.
6. The Representation of People Act (1951) provides for the disqualification of members of the Parliament or a state legislature for indulging in corrupt practice, that is, soliciting votes on the ground of religion or promoting enmity between different sections of people on grounds of caste, race, language, religion and so on.
7. The Wildlife (Protection) Act of 1972 prohibits trade in rare and endangered species.
8. The Forest (Conservation) Act of 1980 checks indiscriminate deforestation and diversion of forest land for nonforest purposes.

Amendment of the Constitution:
Like any other written Constitution, the Constitution of India also provides for its amendment in order to adjust itself to the changing conditions and needs. However, the procedure laid down for its amendment is neither as easy as in Britain nor as difficult as in USA. In other words, the Indian Constitution is neither flexible nor rigid but a synthesis of both. 
Article 368 in Part XX of the Constitution deals with the powers of Parliament to amend the Constitution and its procedure. It states that the Parliament may, in exercise of its constituent power, amend by way of addition, variation or repeal any provision of the Constitution in accordance with the procedure laid down for the purpose. However, the Parliament cannot amend those provisions which form the ‘basic structure’ of the Constitution. This was ruled by the Supreme Court in the Kesavananda Bharati case (1973).

PROCEDURE FOR AMENDMENT:
The procedure for the amendment of the Constitution as laid down in Article 368 is as follows:
1. An amendment of the Constitution can be initiated only by the introduction of a bill for the purpose in either House of Parliament and not in the state legislatures.
2. The bill can be introduced either by a minister or by a private member and does not require prior permission of the president.
3. The bill must be passed in each House by a special majority, that is, a majority of the total membership of the House and a majority of two-thirds of the members of the House present and voting.
4. Each House must pass the bill separately. In case of a disagreement between the two Houses, there is no provision for holding a joint sitting of the two Houses for the purpose of deliberation and passage of the bill. 
5. If the bill seeks to amend the federal provisions of the Constitution, it must also be ratified by the legislatures of half of the states by a simple majority, that is, a majority of the members of the House present and voting.
6. After duly passed by both the Houses of Parliament and ratified by the state legislatures, where necessary, the bill is presented to the president for assent.
7. The president must give his assent to the bill. He can neither withhold his assent to the bill nor return the bill for reconsideration of the Parliament.
8. After the president’s assent, the bill becomes an Act (i.e., a constitutional amendment act) and the Constitution stands amended in accordance with the terms of the Act.

TYPES OF AMENDMENTS:
Article 368 provides for two types of amendments, that is, by a special majority of Parliament and also through the ratification of half of the states by a simple majority. But, some other articles provide for the amendment of certain provisions of the Constitution by a simple majority of Parliament, that is, a majority of the members of each House present and voting (similar to the ordinary legislative process). Notably, these amendments are not deemed to be amendments of the Constitution for the purposes of Article 368.
Therefore, the Constitution can be amended in three ways:
(a) Amendment by simple majority of the Parliament,
(b) Amendment by special majority of the Parliament, and
(c) Amendment by special majority of the Parliament and the ratification of half of the state legislatures.

By Simple Majority of Parliament:
A number of provisions in the Constitution can be amended by a simple majority of the two Houses of Parliament outside the scope of Article 368. These provisions include:
1. Admission or establishment of new states.
2. Formation of new states and alteration of areas, boundaries or names of existing states.
3. Abolition or creation of legislative councils in states.
4. Second Schedule–emoluments, allowances, privileges and so on of the president, the governors, the Speakers, judges, etc.
5. Quorum in Parliament.
6. Salaries and allowances of the members of Parliament.
7. Rules of procedure in Parliament.
8. Privileges of the Parliament, its members and its committees.
9. Use of English language in Parliament.
10. Number of puisne judges in the Supreme Court.
11. Conferment of more jurisdiction on the Supreme Court.
12. Use of official language.
13. Citizenship–acquisition and termination.
14. Elections to Parliament and state legislatures.
15. Delimitation of constituencies.
16. Union territories.
17. Fifth Schedule–administration of scheduled areas and scheduled tribes.
18. Sixth Schedule–administration of tribal areas.

By Special Majority of Parliament:
The majority of the provisions in the Constitution need to be amended by a special majority of the Parliament, that is, a majority of the total membership of each House and a majority of two-thirds of the members of each House present and voting. The expression ‘total membership’ means the total number of members comprising the House irrespective of fact whether there are vacancies or absentees.
‘Strictly speaking, the special majority is required only for voting at the third reading stage of the bill but by way of abundant caution the requirement for special majority has been provided for in the rules of the Houses in respect of all the effective stages of the bill’. The provisions which can be amended by this way includes: 
(i) Fundamental Rights; 
(ii) Directive Principles of State Policy; and
(iii) All other provisions which are not covered by the first and third categories.

By Special Majority of Parliament and Consent of States:
Those provisions of the Constitution which are related to the federal structure of the polity can be amended by a special majority of the Parliament and also with the consent of half of the state legislatures by a simple majority. If one or some or all the remaining states take no action on the bill, it does not matter; the moment half of the states give their consent, the formality is completed. There is no time limit within which the states should give their consent to the bill. The following provisions can be amended in this way:
1. Election of the President and its manner.
2. Extent of the executive power of the Union and the states.
3. Supreme Court and high courts.
4. Distribution of legislative powers between the Union and the states.
5. Goods and Services Tax Council3a.
6. Any of the lists in the Seventh Schedule.
7. Representation of states in Parliament.
8. Power of Parliament to amend the Constitution and its procedure (Article 368 itself).

CRITICISM OF THE AMENDMENT PROCEDURE:
Critics have criticised the amendment procedure of the Constitution on the following grounds: 
1. There is no provision for a special body like Constitutional Convention (as in USA) or Constitutional Assembly for amending the Constitution. The constituent power is vested in the Parliament and only in few cases, in the state legislatures.
2. The power to initiate an amendment to the Constitution lies with the Parliament. Hence, unlike in USA4 , the state legislatures cannot initiate any bill or proposal for amending the Constitution except in one case, that is, passing a resolution requesting the Parliament for the creation or abolition of legislative councils in the states. Here also, the Parliament can either approve or disapprove such a resolution or may not take any action on it.
3. Major part of the Constitution can be amended by the Parliament alone either by a special majority or by a simple majority. Only in few cases, the consent of the state legislatures is required and that too, only half of them, while in USA, it is three-fourths of the states. 
4. The Constitution does not prescribe the time frame within which the state legislatures should ratify or reject an amendment submitted to them. Also, it is silent on the issue whether the states can withdraw their approval after according the same.
5. There is no provision for holding a joint sitting of both the Houses of Parliament if there is a deadlock over the passage of a constitutional amendment bill. On the other hand, a provision for a joint sitting is made in the case of an ordinary bill.
6. The process of amendment is similar to that of a legislative process. Except for the special majority, the constitutional amendment bills are to be passed by the Parliament in the same way as ordinary bills.
7. The provisions relating to the amendment procedure are too sketchy. 

Hence, they leave a wide scope for taking the matters to the judiciary. Despite these defects, it cannot be denied that the process has proved to be simple and easy and has succeeded in meeting the changed needs and conditions. The procedure is not so flexible as to allow the ruling parties to change it according to their whims. Nor is it so rigid as to be incapable of adopting itself to the changing needs. It, as rightly said by K.C. Wheare, ‘strikes a good balance between flexibility and rigidity’. In this context, Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru said in the Constituent Assembly, ‘While we want this Constitution to be as solid and permanent as we can make it, there is no permanence in a Constitution. There should be a certain flexibility. If you make any Constitution rigid and permanent, you stop the nation’s growth, the growth of a living, vital, organic people’.
Similarly, Dr. B.R. Ambedkar observed in the Constituent Assembly that, ‘The Assembly has not only refrained from putting a seal of finality and infallibility upon this Constitution by denying the people the right to amend the Constitution as in Canada or by making the amendment of the Constitution subject to the fulfilment of extraordinary terms and conditions as in America or Australia, but has provided for a facile procedure for amending the Constitution’.
K.C. Wheare has admired the variety of amendment procedures contained in the Constitution of India. He said, ‘this variety in the amending process is wise but rarely found’. According to Granville Austin, ‘the amending process has proved itself one of the most ably conceived aspects of the Constitution. Although it appears complicated, it is merely diverse’.

Basic Structure of the Constitution:

EMERGENCE OF THE BASIC STRUCTURE:
The question whether Fundamental Rights can be amended by the Parliament under Article 368 came for consideration of the Supreme Court within a year of the Constitution coming into force. In the Shankari Prasad case1 (1951), the constitutional validity of the First Amendment Act (1951), which curtailed the right to property, was challenged. The Supreme Court ruled that the power of the Parliament to amend the Constitution under Article 368 also includes the power to amend Fundamental Rights. The word ‘law’ in Article 13 includes only ordinary laws and not the constitutional amendment acts (constituent laws). Therefore, the Parliament can abridge or take away any of the Fundamental Rights by enacting a constitutional amendment act and such a law will not be void under Article 13.

But in the Golak Nath case (1967), the Supreme Court reversed its earlier stand. In that case, the constitutional validity of  the Seventeenth Amendment Act (1964), which inserted certain state acts in the Ninth Schedule, was challenged. The Supreme Court ruled that the Fundamental Rights are given a ‘transcendental and immutable’ position and hence, the Parliament cannot abridge or take away any of these rights. A constitutional amendment act is also a law within the meaning of Article 13 and hence, would be void for violating any of the Fundamental Rights.

The Parliament reacted to the Supreme Court’s judgement in the Golak Nath case (1967) by enacting the 24th Amendment Act (1971). This Act amended Articles 13 and 368. It declared that the Parliament has the power to abridge or take away any of the Fundamental Rights under Article 368 and such an act will not be a law under the meaning of Article 13. However, in the Kesavananda Bharati case (1973), the Supreme Court overruled its judgement in the Golak Nath case (1967). It upheld the validity of the 24th Amendment Act (1971) and stated that Parliament is empowered to abridge or take away any of the Fundamental Rights. At the same time, it laid down a new doctrine of the ‘basic structure’ (or ‘basic features’) of the Constitution. It ruled that the constituent power of Parliament under Article 368 does not enable it to alter the ‘basic structure’ of the Constitution. This means that the Parliament cannot abridge or take away a Fundamental Right that forms a part of the ‘basic structure’ of the Constitution.

The doctrine of basic structure of the constitution was reaffirmed and applied by the Supreme Court in the Indira Nehru Gandhi case (1975). In this case, the Supreme Court invalidated a provision of the 39th Amendment Act (1975) which kept the election disputes involving the Prime Minister and the Speaker of Lok Sabha outside the jurisdiction of all courts. The court said that this provision was beyond the amending power of Parliament as it affected the basic structure of the constitution. Again, the Parliament reacted to this judicially innovated doctrine of ‘basic structure’ by enacting the 42nd Amendment Act
(1976). This Act amended Article 368 and declared that there is no limitation on the constituent power of Parliament and no amendment can be questioned in any court on any ground including that of the contravention of any of the Fundamental Rights.

However, the Supreme Court in the Minerva Mills case (1980) invalidated this provision as it excluded judicial review which is a ‘basic feature’ of the Constitution. Applying the doctrine of ‘basic structure’ with respect to Article 368, the court held that: “Since the Constitution had conferred a limited amending power on the Parliament, the Parliament cannot under the exercise of that limited power enlarge that very power into an absolute power. Indeed, a limited amending power is one of the basic features of the Constitution and, therefore, the limitations on that power cannot be destroyed. In other words, Parliament cannot, under article 368, expand its amending power so as to acquire for itself the right to repeal or abrogate the Constitution or to destroy its basic features. The donee of a limited power cannot by the
exercise of that power convert the limited power into an unlimited one”.

Again in the Waman Rao case (1981), the Supreme Court adhered to the doctrine of the ‘basic structure’ and further clarified  that it would apply to constitutional amendments enacted after April 24, 1973 (i.e., the date of the judgement in the Kesavananda Bharati case).

ELEMENTS OF THE BASIC STRUCTURE:
The present position is that the Parliament under Article 368 can amend any part of the Constitution including the Fundamental Rights but without affecting the ‘basic structure’ of the Constitution. However, the Supreme Court is yet to define or clarify as to what constitutes the ‘basic structure’ of the Constitution. From the various judgements, the following have emerged as ‘basic features’ of the Constitution or elements of the ‘basic structure’ of the constitution:
1. Supremacy of the Constitution
2. Sovereign, democratic and republican nature of the Indian polity
3. Secular character of the Constitution
4. Separation of powers between the legislature, the executive and the judiciary
5. Federal character of the Constitution
6. Unity and integrity of the nation
7. Welfare state (socio-economic justice)
8. Judicial review
9. Freedom and dignity of the individual
10. Parliamentary system
11. Rule of law
12. Harmony and balance between Fundamental Rights and Directive Principles
13. Principle of equality
14. Free and fair elections
15. Independence of Judiciary
16. Limited power of Parliament to amend the Constitution
17. Effective access to justice
18. Principles (or essence) underlying fundamental rights
19. Powers of the Supreme Court under Articles 32, 136, 141 and 1426
20. Powers of the High Courts under Articles 226 and 2277

 Parliamentary System:
The Constitution of India provides for a parliamentary form of government, both at the Centre and in the states. Articles 74 and 75 deal with the parliamentary system at the Centre and Articles 163 and 164 in the states. Modern democratic governments are classified into parliamentary and presidential on the basis of nature of relations between the executive and the legislative organs of the government. The parliamentary system of government is the one in which the executive is responsible to the legislature for its policies and acts. The presidential system of government, on the other hand, is one in which the executive is not responsible to the legislature for its policies and acts, and is constitutionally independent of the legislature in respect of its term of office. 
The parliamentary government is also known as cabinet government or responsible government or Westminster model of government and is prevalent in Britain, Japan, Canada, India among others. The presidential government, on the other hand, is also known as non-responsible or non-parliamentary or fixed executive system of government and is prevalent in USA, Brazil, Russia, Sri Lanka among others.
Ivor Jennings called the parliamentary system as ‘cabinet system’ because the cabinet is the nucleus of power in a parliamentary system. The parliamentary government is also known as ‘responsible government’ as the cabinet (the real executive) is accountable to the Parliament and stays in office so long as it enjoys the latter’s confidence. It is described as ‘Westminster model of government’ after the location of the British Parliament, where the parliamentary system originated. 
In the past, the British constitutional and political experts described the Prime Minister as ‘primus inter pares’ (first among equals) in relation to the cabinet. In the recent period, the Prime Minister’s power, influence and position have increased significantly vis-a-vis the cabinet. He has come to play a ‘dominant’ role in the British politico-administrative system. Hence, the later political analysts, like Cross-man, Mackintosh and others have described the British system of government as ‘prime ministerial government’. The same description holds good in the Indian context too.

FEATURES OF PARLIAMENTARY GOVERNMENT:
The features or principles of parliamentary government in India are:
1. Nominal and Real Executives:
The President is the nominal executive (de jure executive or titular executive) while the Prime Minister is the real executive (de facto executive). Thus, the President is head of the State, while the Prime Minister is head of the government. Article 74 provides for a council of ministers headed by the Prime Minister to aid and advise the President in the exercise of his functions. The advice so tendered is binding on the President. 

2. Majority Party Rule:
The political party which secures majority seats in the Lok Sabha forms the government. The leader of that party is appointed as the Prime Minister by the President; other ministers are appointed by the President on the advice of the prime minister. However, when no single party gets the majority, a coalition of parties may be invited by the President to form the government.

3. Collective Responsibility:
This is the bedrock principle of parliamentary government. The ministers are collectively responsible to the Parliament in general and to the Lok Sabha in particular (Article 75). They act as a team, and swim and sink together. The principle of collective responsibility implies that the Lok Sabha can remove the ministry (i.e., council of ministers headed by the prime minister) from office by passing a vote of no confidence.

4. Political Homogeneity:
Usually members of the council of ministers belong to the same political party, and hence they share the same political ideology. In case of coalition government, the ministers are bound by consensus.

5. Double Membership :
The ministers are members of both the legislature and the executive. This means that a person cannot be a minister without being a member of the Parliament. The Constitution stipulates that a minister who is not a member of the Parliament for a period of six consecutive months ceases to be a minister.

6. Leadership of the Prime Minister:
The Prime Minister plays the leadership role in this system of government. He is the leader of council of ministers, leader of the Parliament and leader of the party in power. In these capacities, he plays a significant and highly crucial role in the functioning of the government.

7. Dissolution of the Lower House:
The lower house of the Parliament (Lok Sabha) can be dissolved by the President on recommendation of the Prime Minister. In other words, the prime minister can advise the President to dissolve the Lok Sabha before the expiry of its term and hold fresh elections. This means that the executive enjoys the right to get the legislature dissolved in a parliamentary system.

8. Secrecy:
The ministers operate on the principle of secrecy of procedure and cannot divulge information about their proceedings, policies  and decisions. They take the oath of secrecy before entering their office. The oath of secrecy to the ministers is administered by the President.

FEATURES OF PRESIDENTIAL GOVERNMENT:
Unlike the Indian Constitution, the American Constitution provides for the presidential form of government. The features of the American presidential system of government are as follows: 
(a) The American President is both the head of the State and the head of government. As the head of State, he occupies a ceremonial position. As the head of government, he leads the executive organ of government.
(b) The President is elected by an electoral college for a fixed tenure of four years. He cannot be removed by the Congress except by impeachment for a grave unconstitutional act.
(c) The President governs with the help of a cabinet or a smaller body called ‘Kitchen Cabinet’. It is only an advisory body and consists of non-elected departmental secretaries. They are selected and appointed by him, are responsible only to him, and can be removed by him any time. 
(d) The President and his secretaries are not responsible to the Congress for their acts. They neither possess membership in the Congress nor attend its sessions.
(e) The President cannot dissolve the House of Representatives–the lower house of the Congress.
(f) The doctrine of separation of powers is the basis of the American presidential system. The legislative, executive and judicial powers of the government are separated and vested in the three independent organs of the government.

MERITS OF THE PARLIAMENTARY SYSTEM:

The parliamentary system of government has the following merits:
1. Harmony Between Legislature and Executive:
The greatest advantage of the parliamentary system is that it ensures harmonious relationship and cooperation between the legislative and executive organs of the government. The executive is a part of the legislature and both are interdependent at work. As a result, there is less scope for disputes and conflicts between the two organs.

2. Responsible Government:
By its very nature, the parliamentary system establishes a responsible government. The ministers are responsible to the Parliament for all their acts of omission and commission. The Parliament exercises control over the ministers through various devices like question hour, discussions, adjournment motion, no confidence motion, etc.

3. Prevents Despotism:
Under this system, the executive authority is vested in a group of individuals (council of ministers) and not in a single person. This dispersal of authority checks the dictatorial tendencies of the executive. Moreover, the executive is responsible to the Parliament and can be removed by a no-confidence motion.

4. Ready Alternative Government:
In case the ruling party loses its majority, the Head of the State can invite the opposition party to form the government. This means an alternative government can be formed without fresh elections. Hence, Dr. Jennings says, ‘the leader of the opposition is the alternative prime minister’.

5. Wide Representation:
In a parliamentary system, the executive consists of a group of individuals (i.e., ministers who are representatives of the people). Hence, it is possible to provide representation to all sections and regions in the government. The prime minister while selecting his ministers can take this factor into consideration.

DEMERITS OF THE PARLIAMENTARY SYSTEM:
In spite of the above merits, the parliamentary system suffers from the following demerits:
1. Unstable Government:
The parliamentary system does not provide a stable government. There is no guarantee that a government can survive its tenure. The ministers depend on the mercy of the majority legislators for their continuity and survival in office. A no-confidence motion or political defection or evils of multiparty coalition can make the government unstable. The Government headed by Morarji Desai, Charan Singh, V.P. Singh, Chandra Sekhar, Deva Gowda and I.K. Gujral are some such examples.

2. No Continuity of Policies:
The parliamentary system is not conductive for the formulation and implementation of longterm policies. This is due to the uncertainty of the tenure of the government. A change in the ruling party is usually followed by changes in the policies of the government. For example, the Janata Government headed by Morarji Desai in 1977 reversed a large number of policies of the previous Congress Government. The same was repeated by the Congress government after it came back to power in 1980.

3. Dictatorship of the Cabinet:
When the ruling party enjoys absolute majority in the Parliament, the cabinet becomes autocratic and exercises nearly unlimited powers. H.J. Laski says that the parliamentary system gives the executive an opportunity for tyranny. Ramsay Muir, the former British Prime Minister, also complained of the ‘dictatorship of the cabinet’. This phenomena was witnessed during the era of Indira Gandhi and Rajiv Gandhi.

4. Against Separation of Powers:
In the parliamentary system, the legislature and the executive are together and inseparable. The cabinet acts as the leader of legislature as well as the executive. As Bagehot points out, ‘the cabinet is a hyphen that joins the buckle that binds the executive and legislative departments together.’ Hence, the whole system of government goes against the letter and spirit of the theory of separation of powers. In fact, there is a fusion of powers.

5. Government by Amateurs:
The parliamentary system is not conducive to administrative efficiency as the ministers are not experts in their fields. The Prime Minister has a limited choice in the selection of ministers; his choice is restricted to the members of Parliament alone and does not extend to external talent. Moreover, the ministers devote most of their time to parliamentary work, cabinet meetings and party activities.

DISTINCTION BETWEEN INDIAN AND BRITISH MODELS:
The parliamentary system of government in India is largely based on the British parliamentary system. However, it never became a replica of the British system and differs in the following respects:
1. India has a republican system in place of British monarchical system. In other words, the Head of the State in India (that is, President) is elected, while the Head of the State in Britain (that is, King or Queen) enjoys a hereditary position. 

2. The British system is based on the doctrine of the sovereignty of Parliament, while the Parliament is not supreme in India and enjoys limited and restricted powers due to a written Constitution, federal system, judicial review and fundamental rights.

3. In Britain, the prime minister should be a member of the Lower House (House of Commons) of the Parliament. In India, the prime minister may be a member of any of the two Houses of Parliament.

4. Usually, the members of Parliament alone are appointed as ministers in Britain. In India, a person who is not a member of Parliament can also be appointed as minister, but for a maximum period of six months.

5. Britain has the system of legal responsibility of the minister while India has no such system. Unlike in Britain, the ministers in India are not required to countersign the official acts of the Head of the State.

6. ‘Shadow cabinet’ is an unique institution of the British cabinet system. It is formed by the opposition party to balance the ruling cabinet and to prepare its members for future ministerial office. There is no such institution in India.

Federal System:
Political scientists have classified governments into unitary and federal on the basis of the nature of relations between the national government and the regional governments. By definition, a unitary government is one in which all the powers are vested in the national government and the regional governments, if at all exist, derive their authority from the national government. A federal government, on the other hand, is one in which powers are divided between the national government and the regional governments by the Constitution itself and both operate in their respective jurisdictions independently. Britain, France, Japan, China, Italy, Belgium, Norway, Sweden, Spain and so on have the unitary model of government while the US, Switzerland, Australia, Canada, Russia, Brazil, Argentina and so on have the federal model of government. In a federal model, the national government is known as the Federal government or the Central government or the Union government and the regional government is known as the state government or the provincial government.

The term ‘federation’ is drived from a Latin word foedus which means ‘treaty’ or ‘agreement’. Thus, a federation is a new state (political system) which is formed through a treaty or an agreement between the various units. The units of a federation are known by various names like states (as in US) or cantons (as in Switzerland) or provinces (as in Canada) or republics (as in Russia). 

A federation can be formed in two ways, that is, by way of integration or by way of disintegration. In the first case, a number of militarily weak or economically backward states (independent) come together to form a big and a strong union, as for example, the US. In the second case, a big unitary state is converted into a federation by granting autonomy to the provinces to promote regional interest (for example, Canada). The US is the first and the oldest federation in the world. It was formed in 1787 following the American Revolution (1775–83). It comprises 50 states (originally 13 states) and is taken as the model of federation. The Canadian Federation, comprising 10 provinces (originally 4 provinces) is also quite old–formed in 1867.
The Constitution of India provides for a federal system of government in the country. The framers adopted the federal system due to two main reasons–the large size of the country and its sociocultural diversity. They realised that the federal system not only ensures the efficient governance of the country but also reconciles national unity with regional autonomy. However, the term ‘federation’ has no where been used in the Constitution. Instead, Article 1 of the Constitution describes India as a ‘Union of States’. 
According to Dr. B.R. Ambedkar, the phrase ‘Union of States’ has been preferred to ‘Federation of States’ to indicate two things: 
(i) the Indian federation is not the result of an agreement among the states like the American federation; and 
(ii) the states have no right to secede from the federation. The federation is union because it is indestructible.

The Indian federal system is based on the ‘Canadian model’ and not on the ‘American model’. The ‘Canadian model’ differs fundamentally from the ‘American model’ in so far as it establishes a very strong centre. The Indian federation resembles the Candian federation 
(i) in its formation (i.e., by way of disintegration); 
(ii) in its preference to the term ‘Union’ (the Canadian federation is also called a ‘Union’); and 
(iii) in its centralising tendency (i.e., vesting more powers in the centre vis-a-vis the states).

FEDERAL FEATURES OF THE CONSTITUTION:
The federal features of the Constitution of India are explained below:
1. Dual Polity:
The Constitution establishes a dual polity consisting the Union at the Centre and the states at the periphery. Each is endowed with sovereign powers to be exercised in the field assigned to them respectively by the Constitution. The Union government deals with the matters of national importance like defence, foreign affairs, currency, communication and so on. The state governments, on the
other hand, look after the matters of regional and local importance like public order, agriculture, health, local government and so on.

2. Written Constitution:
The Constitution is not only a written document but also the lengthiest Constitution of the world. Originally, it contained a Preamble, 395 Articles (divided into 22 Parts) and 8 Schedules. At present, it consists of a Preamble, about 448 Articles (divided into 25 Parts) and 12 Schedules. It specifies the structure, organisation, powers and functions of both the Central and state governments and prescribes the limits within which they must operate. Thus, it avoids the misunderstandings and disagreements between the two.

3. Division of Powers:
The Constitution divided the powers between the Centre and the states in terms of the Union List, State List and Concurrent List in the Seventh Schedule. The Union List consists of 98 subjects (originally 97), the State List 59 subjects (originally 66) and the Concurrent List 52 subjects (originally 47). Both the Centre and the states can make laws on the subjects of the concurrent list, but in case of a conflict, the Central law prevails. The residuary subjects (ie, which are not mentioned in any of the three lists) are given to the Centre. 

4. Supremacy of the Constitution:
The Constitution is the supreme (or the highest) law of the land. The laws enacted by the Centre and the states must conform to its provisions. Otherwise, they can be declared invalid by the Supreme Court or the high courts through their power of judicial review. Thus, the organs of the government (legislative, executive and judicial) at both the levels must operate within the jurisdiction prescribed by the Constitution. 

5. Rigid Constitution:
The division of powers established by the Constitution as well as the supremacy of the Constitution can be maintained only if the method of its amendment is rigid. Hence, the Constitution is rigid to the extent that those provisions which are concerned with the federal structure (i.e., Centre-state relations and judicial organisation) can be amended only by the joint action of the Central and state governments. Such provisions require for their amendment a special majority4 of the Parliament and also an approval of half of the state legislatures.

6. Independent Judiciary: The Constitution establishes an independent judiciary headed by the Supreme Court for two purposes: one, to protect the supremacy of the Constitution by exercising the power of judicial review; and two, to settle the disputes between the Centre and the states or between the states. The Constitution contains various measures like security of tenure to judges, fixed service conditions and so on to make the judiciary independent of the government.

7. Bicameralism:
The Constitution provides for a bicameral legislature consisting of an Upper House (Rajya Sabha) and a Lower House (Lok Sabha). The Rajya Sabha represents the states of Indian Federation, while
the Lok Sabha represents the people of India as a whole. The Rajya Sabha (even though a less powerful chamber) is required to maintain the federal equilibrium by protecting the interests of the
states against the undue interference of the Centre. 

UNITARY FEATURES OF THE CONSTITUTION:
Besides the above federal features, the Indian Constitution also possesses the following unitary or non-federal features:
1. Strong Centre:
The division of powers is in favour of the Centre and highly inequitable from the federal angle. Firstly, the Union List contains more subjects than the State List. Secondly, the more important subjects have been included in the Union List. Thirdly, the Centre has overriding authority over the Concurrent List. Finally, the residuary powers have also been left with the Centre, while in the US, they are vested in the states. Thus, the Constitution has made the Centre very strong.

2. States Not Indestructible:
Unlike in other federations, the states in India have no right to territorial integrity. The Parliament can by unilateral action change the area, boundaries or name of any state. Moreover, it requires only a simple majority and not a special majority. Hence, the Indian Federation is “an indestructible Union of destructible states”. The American Federation, on the other hand, is described as “an indestructible Union of indestructible states”.

3. Single Constitution:
Usually, in a federation, the states have the right to frame their own Constitution separate from that of the Centre. In India, on the contrary, no such power is given to the states. The Constitution of India embodies not only the Constitution of the Centre but also those of the states. Both the Centre and the states must operate within this single-frame. The only exception in this regard was the case of Jammu and Kashmir which had its own (state) Constitution.

4. Flexibility of the Constitution:
The process of constitutional amendment is less rigid than what is found in other federations. The bulk of the Constitution can be amended by the unilateral action of the Parliament, either by simple majority or by special majority. Further, the power to initiate an amendment to the Constitution lies only with the Centre. In US, the states can also propose an amendment to the Constitution. 

5. No Equality of State Representation:
The states are given representation in the Rajya Sabha on the basis of population. Hence, the membership varies from 1 to 31. In US, on the other hand, the principle of equality of representation of states in the Upper House is fully recognised. Thus, the American Senate has 100 members, two from each state. This principle is regarded as a safeguard for smaller states.

6. Emergency Provisions:
The Constitution stipulates three types of emergencies–national, state and financial. During an emergency, the Central government becomes all powerful and the states go into the total control of the Centre. It converts the federal structure into a unitary one without a formal amendment of the Constitution. This kind of transformation is not found in any other federation.

7. Single Citizenship:
In spite of a dual polity, the Constitution of India, like that of Canada, adopted the system of single citizenship. There is only Indian Citizenship and no separate state citizenship. All citizens irrespective of the state in which they are born or reside enjoy the same rights all over the country. The other federal states like US, Switzerland and Australia have dual citizenship, that is, national citizenship as well as state citizenship.

8. Integrated Judiciary:
The Indian Constitution has established an integrated judicial system with the Supreme Court at the top and the state high courts below it. This single system of courts enforces both the Central laws as well as the state laws. In US, on the other hand, there is a double system of courts whereby the federal laws are enforced by the federal judiciary and the state laws by the state judiciary.

9. All-India Services:
In US, the Federal government and the state governments have their separate public services. In India also, the Centre and the states have their separate public services. But, in addition, there are all-India services (IAS, IPS, and IFS) which are common to both the Centre and the states. The members of these services are recruited and trained by the Centre which also possess ultimate control over
them. Thus, these services violate the principle of federalism under the Constitution.

10. Integrated Audit Machinery:
The Comptroller and Auditor-General of India audits the accounts of not only the Central government but also those of the states. But, his appointment and removal is done by the president without consulting the states. Hence, this office restricts the financial autonomy of the states. The American Comptroller-General, on the contrary, has no role with respect to the accounts of the states. 

11. Parliament’s Authority Over State List:
Even in the limited sphere of authority allotted to them, the states do not have exclusive control. The Parliament is empowered to legislate on any subject of the State List if Rajya Sabha passes a resolution to that effect in the national interest. This means that the legislative competence of the Parliament can be extended without amending the Constitution. Notably, this can be done when there is no emergency of any kind. 

12. Appointment of Governor:
The governor, who is the head of the state, is appointed by the President. He holds office during the pleasure of the President. He also acts as an agent of the Centre. Through him, the Centre exercises control over the states. The American Constitution, on the contrary, provided for an elected head in the states. In this respect, India adopted the Canadian system.

13. Integrated Election Machinery:
The Election Commission conducts elections not only to the Central legislature but also to the state legislatures. But, this body is constituted by the President and the states have no say in this matter. The position is same with regard to the removal of its members as well. On the other hand, US has separate machineries for the conduct of elections at the federal and state levels.

14. Veto Over State Bills:
The governor is empowered to reserve certain types of bills passed by the state legislature for the consideration of the President. The President can withhold his assent to such bills not only in the first instance but also in the second instance. Thus, the President enjoys absolute veto (and not suspensive veto) over state bills. But in US and Australia, the states are autonomous within their fields and there is no provision for any such reservation.

CRITICAL EVALUATION OF THE FEDERAL SYSTEM:
The Constitution of India has deviated from the traditional federal systems like US, Switzerland and Australia and incorporated a large number of unitary or nonfederal features, tilting the balance of power in  favour of the Centre. This has prompted the Constitutional experts to challenge the federal character of the Indian Constitution. Thus, KC Wheare described the Constitution of India as “quasi-federal”. He remarked that “Indian Union is a unitary state with subsidiary federal features rather than a federal state with subsidiary unitary features.” 
According to K Santhanam, the two factors have been responsible for increasing the unitary bias (tendency of centralisation) of the Constitution. These are: 
(i) the dominance of the Centre in the financial sphere and the dependence of the states upon the Central grants; and 
(ii) the emergence of a powerful erstwhile planning commission which controlled the developmental process in the states. 
He observed: “India has practically functioned as a unitary state though the Union and the states have tried to function formally and legally as a federation.”

However, there are other political scientists who do not agree with the above descriptions. Thus, Paul Appleby characterises the Indian system as “extremely federal”. Morris Jones termed it as a
“bargaining federalism”. Ivor Jennings has described it as a “federation with a strong centralising tendency”. He observed that “the Indian Constitution is mainly federal with unique safeguards for enforcing national unity and growth”. Alexandrowicz stated that “India is a case sui generis (i.e., unique in character). Granville Austin called the Indian federalism as a “cooperative federalism”. He said that though the Constitution of India has created a strong Central government, it has not made the state governments weak and has not reduced them to the level of administrative agencies for the execution of policies of the Central government. He described the Indian federation as “a new kind of federation to meet India’s peculiar needs”.

On the nature of Indian Constitution, Dr. B.R. Ambedkar made the following observation in the Constituent Assembly: “The Constitution is a Federal Constitution in as much as it establishes a dual polity. The Union is not a league of states, united in a loose relationship, nor are the states the agencies of the Union, deriving powers from it. Both the Union and the states are created by the Constitution, both derive their respective authority from the Constitution.” 
He further observed: “Yet the Constitution avoids the tight mould of federalism and could be both unitary as well as federal according to the requirements of time and circumstances”. While replying to the criticism of over-centralisation in the Constitution, he stated: “A serious complaint is made on the ground that there is too much centralisation and the states have been reduced to municipalities. It is clear that this view is not only an exaggeration but is also founded on a misunderstanding of what exactly the Constitution contrives to do. As to the relations between the Centre and the states, it is necessary to bear in mind the fundamental principle on which it rests. 
The basic principle of federalism is that the legislative and executive authority is partitioned between the Centre and the states not by any law to be made by the Centre but by the Constitution itself. This is what the Constitution does. The states are in no way dependent upon the Centre for their legislative or executive authority. The states and the Centre are coequal in this matter. It is difficult to see how such a
Constitution can be called centralism. It is, therefore, wrong to say that the states have been placed under the Centre. The Centre cannot by its own will alter the boundary of this partition. Nor can the judiciary”.

In Bommai case (1994), the Supreme Court laid down that the Constitution is federal and characterised federalism as its ‘basic feature’. It observed: “The fact that under the scheme of our Constitution, greater power is conferred upon the Centre vis-a-vis the states does not mean that the states are mere appendages of the Centre. The states have an independent constitutional existence. They are not satellites or agents of the Centre. Within the sphere allotted to them, the states are supreme. The fact that during emergency and in certain other eventualities their powers are overridden or invaded by the Centre is not destructive of the essential federal feature of the Constitution. They are exceptions and the exceptions are not a rule. Let it be said that the federalism in the Indian Constitution is not a matter of administrative convenience, but one of principle–the outcome of our own process and a recognition of the ground realities”.

In fact, the federalism in India represents a compromise between the following two conflicting considerations:
(i) normal division of powers under which states enjoy autonom within their own spheres; and
(ii) need for national integrity and a strong Union government under exceptional circumstances.
The following trends in the working of Indian political system reflects its federal spirit: 
(i) Territorial disputes between states, for example, between Maharashtra and Karnataka over Belgaum; 
(ii) Disputes between states over sharing of river water, for example, between Karnataka and Tamil Nadu over Cauvery Water; 
(iii) The emergence of regional parties and their coming to power in states like Andhra Pradesh, Tamil Nadu, etc.; 
(iv) The creation of new states to fulfil the regional aspirations, for example, Mizoram or Jharkhand; 
(v) Demand of the states for more financial grants from the Centre to meet their developmental needs; 
(vi) Assertion of autonomy by the states and their resistance to the interference from the Centre;
(vii) Supreme Court’s imposition of several procedural limitations on the use of Article 356 (President’s Rule in the States) by the Centre.

Centre-State Relations:
The Constitution of India, being federal in structure, divides all powers (legislative, executive and financial) between the Centre and the states. However, there is no division of judicial power as the Constitution has established an integrated judicial system to enforce both the Central laws as well as state laws. Though the Centre and the states are supreme in their respective fields, the maximum harmony and coordination between them is essential for the effective operation of the federal system. Hence, the Constitution contains elaborate provisions to regulate the various dimensions of the relations between the Centre and the states. 
The Centre-state relations can be studied under three heads:
• Legislative relations.
• Administrative relations.
• Financial relations.

LEGISLATIVE RELATIONS:
Articles 245 to 255 in Part XI of the Constitution deal with the legislative relations between the Centre and the states. Besides these, there are some other articles dealing with the same subject. Like any other Federal Constitution, the Indian Constitution also divides the legislative powers between the Centre and the states with respect to both the territory and the subjects of legislation. Further, the Constitution provides for the parliamentary legislation in the state field under five extraordinary situations as well as the centre’s control over state legislation in certain cases. Thus, there are four aspects in the Centre-states legislative relations, viz.,
• Territorial extent of Central and state legislation;
• Distribution of legislative subjects;
• Parliamentary legislation in the state field; and
• Centre’s control over state legislation.

1. Territorial Extent of Central and State Legislation:
The Constitution defines the territorial limits of the legislative powers vested in the Centre and the states in the following way: 
(i) The Parliament can make laws for the whole or any part of the territory of India. The territory of India includes the states, the union territories, and any other area for the time being included in the territory of India.
(ii) A state legislature can make laws for the whole or any part of the state. The laws made by a state legislature are not applicable outside the state, except when there is a sufficient nexus between the state and the object.
(iii) The Parliament alone can make ‘extraterritorial legislation’. Thus, the laws of the Parliament are also applicable to the Indian citizens and their property in any part of the world. However, the Constitution places certain restrictions on the plenary territorial jurisdiction of the Parliament. In other words, the laws of Parliament are not applicable in the following areas:
(i) The President can make regulations for the peace, progress and good government of the five Union Territories– the Andaman and Nicobar Islands, Lakshadweep, Dadra and Nagar Haveli, Daman
and Diu and Ladakh. A regulation so made has the same force and effect as an act of Parliament. It may also repeal or amend any act of Parliament in relation to these union territories.
(ii) The governor is empowered to direct that an act of Parliament does not apply to a scheduled area in the state or apply with specified modifications and exceptions.
(iii) The Governor of Assam may likewise direct that an act of Parliament does not apply to a tribal area (autonomous district) in the state or apply with specified modifications and exceptions.
The President enjoys the same power with respect to tribal areas (autonomous districts) in Meghalaya, Tripura and Mizoram.

2. Distribution of Legislative Subjects:
The Constitution provides for a three-fold distribution of legislative subjects between the Centre and the states, viz., List-I (the Union List), List-II (the State List) and List-III (the Concurrent List) in the Seventh Schedule: 
(i) The Parliament has exclusive powers to make laws with respect to any of the matters enumerated in the Union List. This list has at present 98 subjects (originally 971 subjects) like defence, banking, foreign affairs, currency, atomic energy, insurance, communication, inter-state trade and commerce, census, audit and so on.

(ii) The state legislature has “in normal circumstances” exclusive powers to make laws with respect to any of the matters enumerated in the State List. This has at present 59 subjects (originally 662 subjects) like public order, police, public health and sanitation, agriculture, prisons, local government, fisheries, markets, theaters, gambling and so on. 

(iii) Both, the Parliament and state legislature can make laws with respect to any of the matters enumerated in the Concurrent List. This list has at present 52 subjects (originally 473 subjects) like criminal law and procedure, civil procedure, marriage and divorce, population control and family planning, electricity, labour welfare, economic and social planning, drugs, newspapers, books and printing press, and others. 
The 42nd Amendment Act of 1976 transferred five subjects to Concurrent List from State List, that is, 
(a) education, 
(b) forests, 
(c) weights and measures, 
(d) protection of wild animals and birds, and 
(e) administration of justice; constitution and organisation of all courts except the Supreme Court and the high courts.

(iv) Parliament has power to make laws with respect to any matter for any part of the territory of India not included in a state even though that matter is one which is enumerated in the State List. This provision has reference to the Union Territories or the Acquired Territories (if any).

(v) The 101st Amendment Act of 2016 has made a special provision with respect to goods and services tax. Accordingly, the Parliament and the state legislature have power to make laws with respect to goods and services tax imposed by the Union or by the State. Further, the parliament has exclusive power to make laws with respect to goods and services tax where the supply of goods or services or both takes place in the course of inter-state trade or commerce.

(vi) The power to make laws with respect to residuary subjects (i.e., the matters which are not enumerated in any of the three lists) is vested in the Parliament. This residuary power of legislation includes the power to levy residuary taxes. 

From the above scheme, it is clear that the matters of national importance and the matters which require uniformity of legislation nationwide are included in the Union List. The matters of regional and
local importance and the matters which permit diversity of interest are specified in the State List. The matters on which uniformity of legislation throughout the country is desirable but not essential are
enumerated in the concurrent list. Thus, it permits diversity along with uniformity. In US, only the powers of the Federal Government are enumerated in the Constitution and the residuary powers are left to the states. The Australian Constitution followed the American pattern of single enumeration of powers. In Canada, on the other hand, there is a double enumeration– Federal and Provincial, and the residuary
powers are vested in the Centre.

The Government of India Act of 1935 provided for a three-fold enumeration, viz., federal, provincial and concurrent. The present Constitution follows the scheme of this act but with one difference, that is, under this act, the residuary powers were given neither to the federal legislature nor to the provincial legislature but to the governorgeneral of India. In this respect, India follows the Canadian precedent. The Constitution expressly secures the predominance of the Union List over the State List and the Concurrent List and that of the Concurrent List over the State List. Thus, in case of overlapping between the Union List and the State List, the former should prevail. In case of overlapping between the Union List and the Concurrent List, it is again the former which should prevail. Where there is a conflict between the Concurrent List and the State List, it is the former that should prevail.

In case of a conflict between the Central law and the state law on a subject enumerated in the Concurrent List, the Central law prevails over the state law. But, there is an exception. If the state law has been 
reserved for the consideration of the president and has received his assent, then the state law prevails in that state. But, it would still be competent for the Parliament to override such a law by subsequently
making a law on the same matter.

3. Parliamentary Legislation in the State Field:
The above scheme of distribution of legislative powers between the Centre and the states is to be maintained in normal times. But, in abnormal times, the scheme of distribution is either modified or suspended. In other words, the Constitution empowers the Parliament to make laws on any matter enumerated in the State List under the following five extraordinary circumstances:
When Rajya Sabha Passes a Resolution If the Rajya Sabha declares that it is necessary in the national interest that Parliament should make laws with respect to goods and services tax or a matter in the State List, then the Parliament becomes competent to make laws on that matter. Such a resolution must be supported by two-thirds of the members present and voting. The resolution remains in force for one year; it can be renewed any number of times but not exceeding one year at a time. The laws cease to have effect on the expiration of six months after the resolution has ceased to be in force.  This provision does not restrict the power of a state legislature to make laws on the same matter. But, in case of inconsistency between a state law and a parliamentary law, the latter is to prevail. During a National Emergency The Parliament acquires the power to legislate with respect to goods and services tax or matters in the State List, while a proclamation of national emergency is in operation. The laws become inoperative on the expiration of six months after the emergency has ceased to operate.

Here also, the power of a state legislature to make laws on the same matter is not restricted. But, in case of repugnancy between a state law and a parliamentary law, the latter is to prevail. When States Make a Request When the legislatures of two or more states pass resolutions requesting the Parliament to enact laws on a matter in the State List, then the Parliament can make laws for regulating that matter. A law so enacted applies only to those states which have passed the resolutions. However, any other state may adopt it afterwards by passing a resolution to that effect in its legislature. Such a law can be amended or repealed only by the Parliament and not by the legislatures of the concerned states. The effect of passing a resolution under the above provision is that the Parliament becomes entitled to legislate with respect to a matter for which it has no power to make a law. 

On the other hand, the state legislature ceases to have the power to make a law with respect to that matter. The resolution operates as abdication or surrender of the power of the state legislature with respect to that matter and it is placed entirely in the hands of Parliament which alone can then legislate with respect to it. Some examples of laws passed under the above provision are 
Prize Competition Act, 1955; Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972; Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974; Urban Land (Ceiling and Regulation) Act, 1976; and Transplantation of Human Organs Act, 1994.

To Implement International Agreements:
The Parliament can make laws on any matter in the State List for implementing the international treaties, agreements or conventions. This provision enables the Central government to fulfil its international
obligations and commitments. Some examples of laws enacted under the above provision are United Nations (Privileges and Immunities) Act, 1947; Geneva Convention Act, 1960; Anti-Hijacking Act, 1982 and legislations relating to environment and TRIPS.

During President’s Rule:
When the President’s rule is imposed in a state, the Parliament becomes empowered to make laws with respect to any matter in the State List in relation to that state. A law made so by the Parliament
continues to be operative even after the president’s rule. This means that the period for which such a law remains in force is not coterminous with the duration of the President’s rule. But, such a law
can be repealed or altered or re-enacted by the state legislature. 

4. Centre’s Control Over State Legislation: 	
Besides the Parliament’s power to legislate directly on the state subjects under the exceptional situations, the Constitution empowers the Centre to exercise control over the state’s legislative matters in the
following ways: 
(i) The governor can reserve certain types of bills passed by the state legislature for the consideration of the President. The president enjoys absolute veto over them.
(ii) Bills on certain matters enumerated in the State List can be introduced in the state legislature only with the previous sanction of the president. (For example, the bills imposing restrictions on the freedom of trade and commerce).
(iii) The Centre can direct the states to reserve money bills and other financial bills passed by the state legislature for the President’s consideration during a financial emergency.

From the above, it is clear that the Constitution has assigned a position of superiority to the Centre in the legislative sphere. In this context, the Sarkaria Commission on Centre-State Relations (1983–88) observed: “The rule of federal supremacy is a technique to avoid absurdity, resolve conflict and ensure harmony between the Union and state laws. If this principle of union supremacy is excluded, it is not 
difficult to imagine its deleterious results. There will be every possibility of our two-tier political system being stultified by interference, strife, legal chaos and confusion caused by a host of conflicting laws, much to the bewilderment of the common citizen. Integrated legislative policy and uniformity on basic issues of common Union-state concern will be stymied. The federal principle of unity in diversity will be very much a casualty. This rule of federal supremacy, therefore, is indispensable for the successful functioning of the federal system”.

ADMINISTRATIVE RELATIONS:
Articles 256 to 263 in Part XI of the Constitution deal with the administrative relations between the Centre and the states. In addition, there are various other articles pertaining to the same matter.

Distribution of Executive Powers:
The executive power has been divided between the Centre and the states on the lines of the distribution of legislative powers, except in few cases. Thus, the executive power of the Centre extends to the
whole of India: (i) to the matters on which the Parliament has exclusive power of legislation (i.e., the subjects enumerated in the Union List); and (ii) to the exercise of rights, authority and jurisdiction
conferred on it by any treaty or agreement. Similarly, the executive power of a state extends to its territory in respect of matters on which the state legislature has exclusive power of legislation (i.e., the
subjects enumerated in the State List). 
In respect of matters on which both the Parliament and the state legislatures have power of legislation (i.e., the subjects enumerated in the Concurrent List), the executive power rests with the states except
when a Constitutional provision or a parliamentary law specifically confers it on the Centre. Therefore, a law on a concurrent subject, though enacted by the Parliament, is to be executed by the states except when the Constitution or the Parliament has directed otherwise.

Obligation of States and the Centre:
The Constitution has placed two restrictions on the executive power of the states in order to give ample scope to the Centre for exercising its executive power in an unrestricted manner. Thus, the executive power of every state is to be exercised in such a way (a) as to ensure compliance with the laws made by the Parliament and any existing law which apply in the state; and (b) as not to impede or prejudice the exercise of executive power of the Centre in the state. While the former lays down a general obligation upon the state, the latter imposes a specific obligation on the state not to hamper the executive
power of the Centre.

Article 245: Extent of laws made by Parliament and by the legislatures of states
Article 246: Subject-matter of laws made by Parliament and by the legislatures of states
Article 246A: Special provision with respect to goods and services tax
Article 247: Power of Parliament to provide for the establishment of certain additional courts
Article 248: Residuary powers of legislation
Article 249: Power of Parliament to legislate with respect to a matter in the state list in the national interest
Article 250: Power of Parliament to legislate with respect to any matter in the state list if a Proclamation of Emergency is in operation
Article 251: Inconsistency between laws made by Parliament under articles 249 and 250 and laws made by the legislatures of states
Article 252: Power of Parliament to legislate for two or more states by consent and adoption of such legislation by any other state
Article 253: Legislation for giving effect to international agreements
Article 254: Inconsistency between laws made by Parliament and laws made by the legislatures of states
Article 255: Requirements as to recommendations and previous sanctions to be regarded as matters of procedure only

In both the cases, the executive power of the Centre extends to giving of such directions to the state as are necessary for the purpose. The sanction behind these directions of the Centre is coercive in
nature. Thus, Article 365 says that where any state has failed to comply with (or to give effect to) any directions given by the Centre, it will be lawful for the President to hold that a situation has arisen in which the government of the state cannot be carried on in accordance with the provisions of the Constitution. It means that, in such a situation, the President’s rule can be imposed in the state under Article 356.

Centre’s Directions to the States:
In addition to the above two cases, the Centre is empowered to give directions to the states with regard to the exercise of their executive power in the following matters:
(i) the construction and maintenance of means of communication (declared to be of national or military importance) by the state;
(ii) the measures to be taken for the protection of the railways within the state;
(iii) the provision of adequate facilities for instruction in the mothertongue at the primary stage of education to children belonging to linguistic minority groups in the state; and
(iv) the drawing up and execution of the specified schemes for the welfare of the Scheduled Tribes in the state.
The coercive sanction behind the Central directions under Article 365 is also applicable in these cases.

Mutual Delegation of Functions:
The distribution of legislative powers between the Centre and the states is rigid. Consequently, the Centre cannot delegate its legislative powers to the states and a single state cannot request the Parliament
to make a law on a state subject. The distribution of executive power in general follows the distribution of legislative powers. But, such a rigid division in the executive sphere may lead to occasional conflicts
between the two. Hence, the Constitution provides for intergovernment delegation of executive functions in order to mitigate rigidity and avoid a situation of deadlock. Accordingly, the President may, with the consent of the state government, entrust to that government any of the executive functions of the Centre. Conversely, the governor of a state may, with the consent of the Central government, entrust to that government any of the executive functions of the state. 
This mutual delegation of administrative functions may be conditional or unconditional. The Constitution also makes a provision for the entrustment of the executive functions of the Centre to a state without the consent of that state. But, in this case, the delegation is by the Parliament and not by the president. Thus, a law made by the Parliament on a subject of the Union List can confer powers and impose duties on a state, or authorise the conferring of powers and imposition of duties by the Centre upon a state (irrespective of the consent of the state
concerned). Notably, the same thing cannot be done by the state legislature. 
From the above, it is clear that the mutual delegation of functions between the Centre and the state can take place either under an agreement or by a legislation. While the Centre can use both the methods, a state can use only the first method.

Cooperation Between the Centre and States:
The Constitution contains the following provisions to secure cooperation and coordination between the Centre and the states:
(i) The Parliament can provide for the adjudication of any dispute or complaint with respect to the use, distribution and control of waters of any inter-state river and river valley.
(ii) The President can establish (under Article 263) an Inter-State Council to investigate and discuss subject of common interest between the Centre and the states. Such a council was set up in 1990.
(iii) Full faith and credit is to be given throughout the territory of India to public acts, records and judicial proceedings of the Centre and every state.
(iv) The Parliament can appoint an appropriate authority to carry out the purposes of the constitutional provisions relating to the interstate freedom of trade, commerce and intercourse. But, no such authority has been appointed so far.

All-India Services:
Like in any other federation, the Centre and the states also have their separate public services called as the Central Services and the State Services respectively. In addition, there are all-India services–IAS, IPS and IFS. The members of these services occupy top positions (or key posts) under both the Centre and the states and serve them by turns.  But, they are recruited and trained by the Centre. These services are controlled jointly by the Centre and the states. The ultimate control lies with the Central government while the immediate control vests with the state governments. 
In 1947, Indian Civil Service (ICS) was replaced by IAS and the Indian Police (IP) was replaced by IPS and were recognised by the Constitution as All-India Services. In 1966, the Indian Forest Service (IFS) was created as the third All-India Service. Article 312 of the Constitution authorises the Parliament to create new All-India Services on the basis of a Rajya Sabha resolution to that effect. Each of these three all-India services, irrespective of their division among different states, form a single service with common rights and status and uniform scales of pay throughout the country. Though the all-India services violate the principle of federalism under the Constitution by restricting the autonomy and patronage of  the states, they are supported on the ground that: 
(i) they help in maintaining high standard of administration in the Centre as well as in  the states; 
(ii) they help to ensure uniformity of the administrative system throughout the country; and 
(iii) they facilitate liaison, cooperation, coordination and joint action on the issues of common interest between the Centre and the states. 

While justifying the institution of all-India services in the Constituent Assembly, Dr. B.R. Ambedkar observed that: “The dual polity which is inherent in a federal system is followed in all federations by a dual
service. In all federations, there is a Federal Civil Service and a State Civil Service. The Indian federation, though a dual polity, will have a dual service, but with one exception. It is recognised that in every 
country there are certain posts in its administrative set up which might be called strategic from the point of view of maintaining the standard of administration. There can be no doubt that the standard of
administration depends upon the calibre of the civil servants who are appointed to the strategic posts. The Constitution provides that without depriving the states of their rights to form their own civil services, there shall be an all-India service, recruited on an all India basis with common qualifications, with uniform scale of pay and members of which alone could be appointed to those strategic posts throughout
the Union”.

Public Service Commissions:
In the field of public service commissions, the Centre-state relations are as follows:
(i) The Chairman and members of a state public service commission, though appointed by the governor of the state, can be removed only by the President.
(ii) The Parliament can establish a Joint State Public Service Commission (JSPSC) for two or more states on the request of the state legislatures concerned. The chairman and members of the JSPSC are appointed by the president.
(iii) The Union Public Service Commission (UPSC) can serve the needs of a state on the request of the state governor and with the approval of the President.
(iv) The UPSC assists the states (when requested by two or more states) in framing and operating schemes of joint recruitment for any services for which candidates possessing special qualifications are required.

Integrated Judicial System:
Though India has a dual polity, there is no dual system of administration of justice. The Constitution, on the other hand, established an integrated judicial system with the Supreme Court at the top and the state high courts below it. This single system of courts enforces both the Central laws as well as the state laws. This is done to eliminate diversities in the remedial procedure. The judges of a state high court are appointed by the president in consultation with the Chief Justice of India and the governor of the state. They can also be transferred and removed by the president. The Parliament can establish a common high court for two or more states. For example, Maharashtra and Goa or Punjab and Haryana have a common high court.

Relations During Emergencies:
(i) During the operation of a national emergency (under Article 352), the Centre becomes entitled to give executive directions to a state on ‘any’ matter. Thus, the state governments are brought under the complete control of the Centre, though they are not suspended.
(ii) When the President’s Rule is imposed in a state (under Article 356), the President can assume to himself the functions of the state government and powers vested in the Governor or any other executive authority in the state.
(iii) During the operation of a financial emergency (under Article 360), the Centre can direct the states to observe canons of financial propriety and can give other necessary directions including the
reduction of salaries of persons serving in the state.

Other Provisions:
The Constitution contains the following other provisions which enable the Centre to exercise control over the state administration: 
(i) Article 355 imposes two duties on the Centre: 
(a) to protect every state against external aggression and internal disturbance; and
(b) to ensure that the government of every state is carried on in accordance with the provisions of the Constitution.

(ii) The governor of a state is appointed by the president. He holds office during the pleasure of the President. In addition to the Constitutional head of the state, the governor acts as an agent of
the Centre in the state. He submits periodical reports to the Centre about the administrative affairs of the state. 

(iii) The state election commissioner, though appointed by the governor of the state, can be removed only by the President.

Extra-Constitutional Devices:
In addition to the above-mentioned constitutional devices, there are extra-constitutional devices to promote cooperation and coordination between the Centre and the states. These include a number of
advisory bodies and conferences held at the Central level. The non-constitutional advisory bodies include the NITI Ayog (which succeeded the planning commission), the National Integration Council, the Central Council of Health and Family Welfare, the Central Council of Local Government, the Zonal Councils, the NorthEastern Council, the Central Council of Indian Medicine, the Central Council of Homoeopathy, the Transport Development Council, the University Grants Commission and so on.

The important conferences held either annually or otherwise to facilitate Centrestate consultation on a wide range of matters are as follows: 
(i) The governors’ conference (presided over by the President). 
(ii) The chief ministers’ conference (presided over by the prime minister). 
(iii) The chief secretaries’ conference (presided over by the cabinet secretary). 
(iv) The conference of inspector-general of police. 
(v) The chief justices’ conference (presided over by the chief justice of India). 
(vi) The conference of vice-chancellors.  
(vii) The home ministers’ conference (presided over by the Central home minister). 
(viii) The law ministers’ conference (presided over by the Central law minister).

FINANCIAL RELATIONS:
Articles 268 to 293 in Part XII of the Constitution deal with Centrestate financial relations. Besides these, there are other provisions dealing with the same subject. These together can be studied under
the following heads:

Allocation of Taxing Powers:
The Constitution divides the taxing powers between the Centre and the states in the following way:
• The Parliament has exclusive power to levy taxes on subjects enumerated in the Union List (which are 13 in number12 ).
• The state legislature has exclusive power to levy taxes on subjects enumerated in the State List (which are 18 in number13 ).
• There are no tax entries in the Concurrent List. In other words, the concurrent jurisdiction is not available with respect to tax legislation. But, the 101st Amendment Act of 2016 has made an exception by making a special provision with respect to goods and services tax. This Amendment has conferred concurrent power upon Parliament and State Legislatures to make laws governing goods and services tax.
• The residuary power of taxation (that is, the power to impose taxes not enumerated in any of the three lists) is vested in the Parliament. Under this provision, the Parliament has imposed gift tax, wealth tax and expenditure tax.

The Constitution also draws a distinction between the power to levy and collect a tax and the power to appropriate the proceeds of the tax so levied and collected. For example, the income-tax is levied and
collected by the Centre but its proceeds are distributed between the Centre and the states. Further, the Constitution has placed the following restrictions on the taxing powers of the states:
(i) A state legislature can impose taxes on professions, trades, callings and employments. But, the total amount of such taxes payable by any person should not exceed Rs.2,500 per annum.

(ii) A state legislature is prohibited from imposing a tax on the supply of goods or services or both in the following two cases : 
(a) where such supply takes place outside the state; and 
(b) where such supply takes place in the course of import or export. Further, the Parliament is empowered to formulate the principles for determining when a supply of goods or services or both takes place outside the state, or in the course of import or export. 

(iii) A state legislature can impose tax on the consumption or sale of electricity. But, no tax can be imposed on the consumption or sale of electricity which is 
(a) consumed by the Centre or sold to the Centre; or 
(b) consumed in the construction, maintenance or operation of any railway by the Centre or by the concerned railway company or sold to the Centre or the railway company for the same purpose. 

(iv) A state legislature can impose a tax in respect of any water or electricity stored, generated, consumed, distributed or sold by any authority established by Parliament for regulating or developing any inter-state river or river valley. But, such a law, to be effective, should be reserved for the president’s consideration and receive his assent.

Distribution of Tax Revenues:
The 80th Amendment Act of 2000 and the 101st Amendment Act of 2016 have introduced major changes in the scheme of the distribution of tax revenues between the centre and the states.
The 80th Amendment was enacted to give effect to the recommendations of the 10th Finance Commission. The Commission recommended that out of the total income obtained from certain central taxes and duties, 29% should go to the states. This is known as the ‘Alternative Scheme of Devolution’ and came into effect retrospectively from April 1, 1996. This amendment has brought several central taxes and duties like Corporation Tax and Customs Duties at par with Income Tax (taxes on income other than agricultural income) as far as their constitutionally mandated sharing with the states is concerned.

The 101st Amendment has paved the way for the introduction of a new tax regime (i.e., goods and services tax - GST) in the country. Accordingly, the Amendment conferred concurrent taxing powers upon
the Parliament and the State Legislatures to make laws for levying GST on every transaction of supply of goods or services or both. The GST replaced a number of indirect taxes levied by the Union and the
State Governments and is intended to remove cascading effect of taxes and provide for a common national market for goods and services. The Amendment provided for subsuming of various central
indirect taxes and levies such as 
(i) Central Excise Duty, 
(ii) Additional Excise Duties, 
(iii) Excise Duty levied under the Medicinal and Toilet Preparations (Excise Duties) Act, 1955, 
(iv) Service Tax, 
(v) Additional Customs Duty commonly known as Countervailing Duty, 
(vi) Special Additional Duty of Customs, and 
(vii) Central Surcharges and Cesses
so far as they related to the supply of goods and services. 
Similarly, the Amendment provided for subsuming of 
(i) State Value Added Tax / Sales Tax, 
(ii) Entertainment Tax (other than the tax levied by the local bodies), 
(iii) Central Sales Tax (levied by the Centre and collected by the States), 
(iv) Octroi and Entry Tax, 
(v) Purchase Tax, 
(vi) Luxury Tax, 
(vii) Taxes on lottery, betting and gambling, and 
(viii) State Surcharges and Cesses in so far as they related to the supply of goods and services. 

Further, the Amendment deleted Article 268-A as well as Entry 92-C in the Union List, both were dealing with service tax. They were added earlier by the 88th Amendment Act of 2003. The service tax was levied by the Centre but collected and appropriated by both the Centre and the States. 
After the above two amendments (i.e., 80th Amendment and 101st Amendment), the present position with respect to the distribution of tax revenues between the centre and the states is as follows:
A. Taxes Levied by the Centre but Collected and Appropriated by the States (Article 268): This category includes the stamp duties on bills of exchange, cheques, promissory notes, policies of insurance,
transfer of shares and others. The proceeds of these duties levied within any state do not form a part of the Consolidated Fund of India, but are assigned to that state.

B. Taxes Levied and Collected by the Centre but Assigned to the States (Article 269): The following taxes fall under this category:
(i) Taxes on the sale or purchase of goods (other than newspapers) in the course of inter-state trade or commerce.
(ii) Taxes on the consignment of goods in the course of inter-state trade or commerce. The net proceeds of these taxes do not form a part of the Consolidated Fund of India. They are assigned to the concerned states in accordance with the principles laid down by the Parliament.

C. Levy and Collection of Goods and Services Tax in Course of Inter-State Trade or Commerce (Article 269-A): The Goods and Services Tax (GST) on supplies in the course of inter-state trade or commerce are levied and collected by the Centre. But, this tax is divided between the Centre and the States in the manner provided by Parliament on the recommendations of the GST Council. Further, the
Parliament is also authorized to formulate the principles for determining the place of supply, and when a supply of goods or services or both takes place in the course of inter-state trade or commerce.

D. Taxes Levied and Collected by the Centre but Distributed between the Centre and the States (Article 270): This category includes all taxes and duties referred to in the Union List except the following:
(i) Duties and taxes referred to in Articles 268, 269 and 269-A
(ii) Surcharge on taxes and duties referred to in Article 271 and
(iii) Any cess levied for specific purposes.
The manner of distribution of the net proceeds of these taxes and duties is prescribed by the President on the recommendation of the Finance Commission.

E. Surcharge on Certain Taxes and Duties for Purposes of the Centre (Article 271):
The Parliament can at any time levy the surcharges on taxes and duties referred to in Articles 269 and 270. The proceeds of such surcharges go to the Centre exclusively. In other words, the states have no share in these surcharges. However, the Goods and Services Tax (GST) is exempted from this surcharge. In other words, this surcharge can not be imposed on the GST.

F. Taxes Levied and Collected and Retained by the States: 
These are the taxes belonging to the states exclusively. They are enumerated in the state list and are 18 in number. These are18 : 
(i) land revenue; (ii) taxes on agricultural income; (iii) duties in respect of succession to agricultural land; (iv) estate duty in respect of agricultural land; (v) taxes on lands and buildings; (vi) taxes on mineral rights; (vii) Duties of excise on alcoholic liquors for human consumption; opium, Indian hemp and other narcotic drugs and narcotics, but not including medicinal and toilet preparations containing alcohol or narcotics; (viii) taxes on the consumption or sale or electricity; (ix) taxes on the sale of petroleum crude, high speed diesel, motor spirit (commonly known as petrol), natural gas, aviation turbine fuel and alcoholic liquor for human consumption, but not including sale in the course of inter-state trade or commerce or sale in the course of international trade or commerce of such goods; (x) taxes on goods and passengers carried by road or inland waterways; (xi) taxes on vehicles; (xii) taxes on animals and boats; (xiii) tolls; (xiv) taxes on professions, trades, callings and employments; (xv) capitation taxes; (xvi) taxes on entertainments and amusements to the extent levied and collected by a Panchayat or a Municipality or a Regional Council or a District Council; (xvii) stamp duty on documents (except those specified in the Union List); and (xviii) fees on the matters enumerated in the State List (except court fees).

Distribution of Non-tax Revenues:
A. The Centre:
The receipts from the following form the major sources of non-tax revenues of the Centre: 
(i) posts and telegraphs; 
(ii) railways; 
(iii) banking; 
(iv) broadcasting 
(v) coinage and currency; 
(vi) central public sector enterprises; 
(vii) escheat and lapse; and 
(viii) others.

B. The States
The receipts from the following form the major sources of non-tax revenues of the states: 
(i) irrigation; 
(ii) forests;
(iii) fisheries; 
(iv) state
public sector enterprises;
 (v) escheat and lapse;20 and 
 (vi) others.

Grants-in-Aid to the States:
Besides sharing of taxes between the Centre and the states, the Constitution provides for grants-in-aid to the states from the Central resources. There are two types of grants-in-aid, viz, statutory grants
and discretionary grants: 

Statutory Grants:
Article 275 empowers the Parliament to make grants to the states which are in need of financial assistance and not to every state. Also, different sums may be fixed for different states. These sums are
charged on the Consolidated Fund of India every year. Apart from this general provision, the Constitution also provides for specific grants for promoting the welfare of the scheduled tribes in a state or for raising the level of administration of the scheduled areas in a state including the State of Assam.
The statutory grants under Article 275 (both general and specific) are given to the states on the recommendation of the Finance Commission.

Discretionary Grants:
Article 282 empowers both the Centre and the states to make any grants for any public purpose, even if it is not within their respective legislative competence. Under this provision, the Centre makes grants
to the states. “These grants are also known as discretionary grants, the reason being that the Centre is under no obligation to give these grants and the matter lies within its discretion. These grants have a two-fold 
purpose: to help the state financially to fulfil plan targets; and to give  some leverage to the Centre to influence and coordinate state action to effectuate the national plan.”

Other Grants:
The Constitution also provided for a third type of grants-in-aid, but for a temporary period. Thus, a provision was made for grants in lieu of export duties on jute and jute products to the States of Assam, Bihar,
Orissa and West Bengal. These grants were to be given for a period of ten years from the commencement of the Constitution. These sums were charged on the Consolidated Fund of India and were made to
the states on the recommendation of the Finance Commission. 

Goods and Services Tax Council:
The smooth and efficient administration of the goods and services tax (GST) requires a co-operation and co-ordination between the Centre and the States. In order to facilitate this consultation process, the
101st Amendment Act of 2016 provided for the establishment of a Goods and Services Tax Council or the GST Council. Article 279-A empowered the President to constitute a GST Council by an order22. The Council is a joint forum of the Centre and the States. It is required to make recommendations to the Centre and the States on the following matters:
(a) The taxes, cesses and surcharges levied by the Centre, the States and the local bodies that would get merged in GST.
(b) The goods and services that may be subjected to GST or exempted from GST.
(c) Model GST Laws, principles of levy, apportionment of GST levied on supplies in the course of inter-state trade or commerce and the principles that govern the place of supply.
(d) The threshold limit of turnover below which goods and services may be exempted from GST.
(e) The rates including floor rates with bands of GST.
(f) Any special rate or rates for a specified period to raise additional resources during any natural calamity or disaster.

Finance Commission:
Article 280 provides for a Finance Commission as a quasi-judicial body. It is constituted by the President every fifth year or even earlier.
It is required to make recommendations to the President on the following matters:
• The distribution of the net proceeds of taxes to be shared between the Centre and the states, and the allocation between the states, the respective shares of such proceeds.
• The principles which should govern the grants-in-aid to the states by the Centre (i.e., out of the Consolidated Fund of India).
• The measures needed to augment the Consolidated fund of a state to supplement the resources of the panchayats and the municipalities in the state on the basis of the recommendations made by the State Finance Commission.
• Any other matter referred to it by the President in the interests of sound finance.

Till 1960, the Commission also suggested the amounts paid to the States of Assam, Bihar, Orissa and West Bengal in lieu of assignment of any share of the net proceeds in each year of export duty on jute
and jute products. The Constitution envisages the Finance Commission as the balancing wheel of fiscal federalism in India.

Protection of the States’ Interest:
To protect the interest of states in the financial matters, the Constitution lays down that the following bills can be introduced in the Parliament only on the recommendation of the President:
• A bill which imposes or varies any tax or duty in which states are interested;
• A bill which varies the meaning of the expression ‘agricultural income’ as defined for the purposes of the enactments relating to Indian income tax;
• A bill which affects the principles on which moneys are or may be distributable to states; and
• A bill which imposes any surcharge on any specified tax or duty for the purpose of the Centre.

The expression “tax or duty in which states are interested” means:
(a) a tax or duty the whole or part of the net proceeds whereof are assigned to any state; or 
(b) a tax or duty by reference to the net proceeds whereof sums are for the time being payable, out of the Consolidated Fund of India to any state.
The phrase ‘net proceeds’ means the proceeds of a tax or a duty minus the cost of collection. The net proceeds of a tax or a duty in any area is to be ascertained and certified by the Comptroller and AuditorGeneral of India. His certificate is final.

Borrowing by the Centre and the States:
The Constitution makes the following provisions with regard to the borrowing powers of the Centre and the states:
• The Central government can borrow either within India or outside upon the security of the Consolidated Fund of India or can give guarantees, but both within the limits fixed by the Parliament. So far, no such law has been enacted by the Parliament.
• Similarly, a state government can borrow within India (and not abroad) upon the security of the Consolidated Fund of the State or can give guarantees, but both within the limits fixed by the legislature of that state.
• The Central government can make loans to any state or give guarantees in respect of loans raised by any state. Any sums required for the purpose of making such loans are to be charged on the Consolidated Fund of India. 
• A state cannot raise any loan without the consent of the Centre, if there is still outstanding any part of a loan made to the state by the Centre or in respect of which a guarantee has been given by the Centre.

Inter-Governmental Tax Immunities:
Like any other federal Constitution, the Indian Constitution also contain the rule of ‘immunity from mutual taxation’ and makes the following provisions in this regard:
Exemption of Central Property from State Taxation:
The property of Centre is exempted from all taxes imposed by a state or any authority within a state like municipalities, district boards, panchayats and so on. But, the Parliament is empowered to remove
this ban. The word ‘property’ includes lands, buildings, chattels, shares, debts, everything that has a money value, and every kind of property–movable or immovable and tangible or intangible. Further,
the property may be used for sovereign (like armed forces) or commercial purposes. The corporations or the companies created by the Central government are not immune from state taxation or local taxation. The reason is that a corporation or a company is a separate legal entity. 

Exemption of State Property or Income from Central Taxation:
The property and income of a state is exempted from Central taxation. Such income may be derived from sovereign functions or commercial functions. But the Centre can tax the commercial operations of a state if Parliament so provides. However, the Parliament can declare any particular trade or business as incidental to the ordinary functions of the government and it would then not be taxable. Notably, the property and income of local authorities situated within a state are not exempted from the Central taxation. Similarly, the property or income of corporations and companies owned by a state can be taxed by the Centre.

The Supreme Court, in an advisory (1963), held that the immunity granted to a state in respect of Central taxation does not extend to the duties of customs or duties of excise. In other words, the Centre can impose customs duty on goods imported or exported by a state, or an excise duty on goods produced or manufactured by a state.

Effects of Emergencies:
The Centre-state financial relations in normal times undergo changes during emergencies. These are as follows:
National Emergency:
While the proclamation of national emergency (under Article 352) is in operation, the president can modify the constitutional distribution of revenues between the Centre and the states. This means that the
president can either reduce or cancel the transfer of finances (both tax sharing and grants-in-aid) from the Centre to the states. Such modification continues till the end of the financial year in which the emergency ceases to operate.

Financial Emergency:
While the proclamation of financial emergency (under Article 360) is in operation, the Centre can give directions to the states: 
(i) to observe the specified canons of financial propriety;
 (ii) to reduce the salaries
and allowances of all class of persons serving in the state; and 
(iii) to reserve all money bills and other financial bills for the consideration of the President.

TRENDS IN CENTRE-STATE RELATIONS:
Till 1967, the centre-state relations by and large were smooth due to one-party rule at the Centre and in most of the states. In 1967 elections, the Congress party was defeated in nine states and its position at the Centre became weak. This changed political scenario heralded a new era in the Centre-state relations. The non-Congress Governments in the states opposed the increasing centralisation and
intervention of the Central government. They raised the issue of state autonomy and demanded more powers and financial resources to the states. This caused tensions and conflicts in Centre-state relations.

Tension Areas in Centre-State Relations:
The issues which created tensions and conflicts between the Centre and states are: 
(1) Mode of appointment and dismissal of governor;
(2) Discriminatory and partisan role of governors; 
(3) Imposition of
President’s Rule for partisan interests; 
(4) Deployment of Central
forces in the states to maintain law and order; 
(5) Reservation of state
bills for the consideration of the President; 
(6) Discrimination in
financial allocations to the states; 
(7) Role of Planning Commission in
approving state projects; 
(8) Management of All-India Services (IAS,
IPS, and IFS); 
(9) Use of electronic media for political purposes; 
(10) Appointment of enquiry commissions against the chief ministers; 
(11) Sharing of finances (between Centre and states); and 
(12) Encroachment by the Centre on the State List.

The issues in Centre-State relations have been under consideration since the mid 1960s. In this direction, the following developments have taken place:
Administrative Reforms Commission:
The Central government appointed a six-member Administrative Reforms Commission (ARC) in 1966 under the chairmanship of Morarji Desai (followed by K Hanumanthayya). Its terms of references
included, among others, the examination of Centre-State relations. In order to examine thoroughly the various issues in Centre-state relations, the ARC constituted a study team under M.C. Setalvad. On
the basis of the report of this study team, the ARC finalised its own report and submitted it to the Central government in 1969. It made 22 recommendations for improving the Centre-state relations. The
important recommendations are:
• Establishment of an Inter-State Council under Article 263 of the Constitution.
• Appointment of persons having long experience in public life and administration and non-partisan attitude as governors.
• Delegation of powers to the maximum extent to the states.
• Transferring of more financial resources to the states to reduce their dependency upon the Centre.
• Deployment of Central armed forces in the states either on their request or otherwise.
No action was taken by the Central government on the recommendations of the ARC.

Rajamannar Committee:
In 1969, the Tamil Nadu Government (DMK) appointed a threemember committee under the chairmanship of Dr. P.V. Rajamannar to examine the entire question of Centre-state relations and to suggest
amendments to the Constitution so as to secure utmost autonomy to the states.25 The committee submitted its report to the Tamil Nadu Government in 1971. The Committee identified the reasons for the prevailing unitary trends (tendencies of centralisation) in the country. They include: 
(i) certain provisions in the Constitution which confer special powers on the Centre; 
(ii) one-party rule both at the Centre and in the states; 
(iii) inadequacy of states’ fiscal resources and consequent dependence
on the Centre for financial assistance; and 
(iv) the institution of Central planning and the role of the Planning Commission.

The important recommendations of the committee are as follows: 
(i) An Inter-State Council should be set up immediately; 
(ii) Finance Commission should be made a permanent body; 
(iii) Planning Commission should be disbanded and its place should be taken by a
statutory body; 
(iv) Articles 356, 357 and 365 (dealing with President’s
Rule) should be totally omitted; 
(v) The provision that the state ministry holds office during the pleasure of the governor should be omitted; 
(vi) Certain subjects of the Union List and the Concurrent List should be transferred to the State List;
(vii) the residuary powers should be allocated to the states; and 
(viii) All-India services (IAS, IPS and IFS) should be abolished.
The Central government completely ignored the recommendations of the Rajamannar Committee.

Anandpur Sahib Resolution:
In 1973, the Akali Dal adopted a resolution containing both political and religious demands in a meeting held at Anandpur Sahib in Punjab. The resolution, generally known as Anandpur Sahib Resolution, demanded that the Centre’s jurisdiction should be restricted only to defence, foreign affairs, communications, and currency and the entire residuary powers should be vested in the states. It stated that the Constitution should be made federal in the real sense and should ensure equal authority and representation to all the states at the Centre.

West Bengal Memorandum:
In 1977, the West Bengal Government (led by the Communists) published a memorandum on Centre-state relations and sent to the Central government. The memorandum inter alia suggested the following: (i) The word ‘union’ in the Constitution should be replaced by the word ‘federal’; 
(ii) The jurisdiction of the Centre should be confined to defence, foreign affairs, currency, communications and economic co-ordination; 
(iii) All other subjects including the residuary should be vested in the states; 
(iv) Articles 356 and 357 (President’s Rule) and 360 (financial emergency) should be repealed; 
(v) State’s consent should be made obligatory for formation of new states or reorganisation of existing states; 
(vi) Of the total revenue raised by the Centre from all sources, 75 per cent should be allocated to the states;
(vii) Rajya Sabha should have equal powers with that of the Lok Sabha; and 
(viii) There should be only Central and state services and the allIndia services should be abolished.
The Central government did not accept the demands made in the memorandum.

Sarkaria Commission:
In 1983, the Central government appointed a three-member Commission on Centrestate relations under the chairmanship of R.S. Sarkaria, a retired judge of the Supreme Court.26 The commission was asked to examine and review the working of existing arrangements between the Centre and states in all spheres and recommend appropriate changes and measures. It was initially given one year to complete its work, but its term was extended four times. It submitted it’s report in 1988.

The Commission did not favour structural changes and regarded the existing constitutional arrangements and principles relating to the institutions basically sound. But, it emphasised on the need for
changes in the functional or operational aspects. It observed that federalism is more a functional arrangement for co-operative action than a static institutional concept. It outrightly rejected the demand for
curtailing the powers of the Centre and stated that a strong Centre is essential to safeguard the national unity and integrity which is being threatened by the fissiparious tendencies in the body politic. However, it did not equate strong Centre with centralisation of powers. It observed that over-centralisation leads to blood pressure at the centre and anaemia at the periphery. The Commission made 247 recommendations to improve Centrestate relations. The important recommendations are mentioned below:
1. A permanent Inter-State Council called the Inter-Governmental Council should be set up under Article 263.
2. Article 356 (President’s Rule) should be used very sparingly, in extreme cases as a last resort when all the available alternatives fail.
3. The institution of All-India Services should be further strengthened and some more such services should be created.
4. The residuary powers of taxation should continue to remain with the Parliament, while the other residuary powers should be placed in the Concurrent List.
5. When the president withholds his assent to the state bills, the reasons should be communicated to the state government.
6. The National Development Council (NDC) should be renamed and reconstituted as the National Economic and Development Council (NEDC).
7. The zonal councils should be constituted afresh and reactivated to promote the spirit of federalism.
8. The Centre should have powers to deploy its armed forces, even without the consent of states. However, it is desirable that the states should be consulted.
9. The Centre should consult the states before making a law on a subject of the Concurrent List.
10. The procedure of consulting the chief minister in the appointment of the state governor should be prescribed in the Constitution itself.
11. The net proceeds of the corporation tax may be made permissibly shareable with the states. 
12. The governor cannot dismiss the council of ministers so long as it commands a majority in the assembly.
13. The governor’s term of five years in a state should not be disturbed except for some extremely compelling reasons.
14. No commission of enquiry should be set up against a state minister unless a demand is made by the Parliament.
15. The surcharge on income tax should not be levied by the Centre except for a specific purpose and for a strictly limited period.
16. The present division of functions between the Finance Commission and the Planning Commission is reasonable and should continue.
17. Steps should be taken to uniformly implement the three language formula in its true spirit.
18. No autonomy for radio and television but decentralisation in their operations.
19. No change in the role of Rajya Sabha and Centre’s power to reorganise the states.
20. The commissioner for linguistic minorities should be activated. 
The Central government has implemented 180 (out of 247) recommendations of the Sarkaria Commission. The most important is the establishment of the Inter-State Council in 1990.

Punchhi Commission:
The Second commission on Centre-State Relations was set-up by the Government of India in April 2007 under the Chairmanship of Madan Mohan Punchhi, former Chief Justice of India.27 It was required to look into the issues of Centre-State relations keeping in view the seachanges that have taken place in the polity and economy of India since the Sarkaria Commission had last looked at the issue of CentreState relations over two decades ago. The terms of reference of the Commission were as follows: 
(i) The Commission was required to examine and review the working of the existing arrangements between the Union and States as per the Constitution of India, the healthy precedents being followed, various pronouncements of the Courts in regard to powers, functions and responsibilities in all spheres including legislative relations, administrative relations, role of governors, emergency provisions, financial relations, economic and social planning, Panchayati Raj institutions, sharing of resources including inter-state river water and recommend such changes or other measures as may be appropriate keeping in view the practical difficulties.
(ii) In examining and reviewing the working of the existing arrangements between the Union and States and making recommendations as to the changes and measures needed, the Commission was required to keep in view the social and economic developments that have taken place over the years, particularly over the last two decades and have due regard to the scheme and framework of the Constitution. 
Such recommendations were also needed to address the growing challenges of ensuring good governance for promoting the welfare of the people whilst strengthening the unity and integrity of the country, and of availing emerging opportunities for sustained and rapid economic growth for alleviating poverty and illiteracy in the early decades of the new millennium. 
(iii) While examining and making its recommendations on the above, the Commission was required to have particular regard, but not limit its mandate to the following:
(a) The role, responsibility and jurisdiction of the Centre vis-a-vis States during major and prolonged outbreaks of communal violence, caste violence or any other social conflict leading to prolonged and escalated violence.
(b) The role, responsibility and jurisdiction of the Centre vis-a-vis States in the planning and implementation of the mega projects like the inter-linking of rivers, that would normally take 15–20 years for completion and hinge vitally on the support of the States. 
(c) The role, responsibility and jurisdiction of the Centre vis-a-vis States in promoting effective devolution of powers and autonomy to Panchayati Raj Institutions and Local Bodies including the Autonomous Bodies under the sixth Schedule of the Constitution within a specified period of time. 
(d) The role, responsibility and jurisdiction of the Centre vis-a-vis States in promoting the concept and practice of independent planning and budgeting at the District level.
(e) The role, responsibility and jurisdiction of the Centre vis-a-vis States in linking Central assistance of various kinds with the performance of the States.
(f) The role, responsibility and jurisdiction of the Centre in adopting approaches and policies based on positive discrimination in favour of backward States.
(g) The impact of the recommendations made by the 8th to 12th Finance Commissions on the fiscal relations between the Centre and the States, especially the greater dependence of the States on devolution of funds from the Centre. 
(h) The need and relevance of separate taxes on the production and on the sales of goods and services subsequent to the introduction of Value Added Tax regime.
(i) The need for freeing inter-State trade in order to establish a unified and integrated domestic market as also in the context of the reluctance of State Governments to adopt the relevant Sarkaria Commission’s recommendation in chapter XVIII of its report. 
(j) The need for setting up a Central Law Enforcement Agency empowered to take up suo moto investigation of crimes having inter-State and/ or international ramifications with serious implications on national security.
(k) The feasibility of a supporting legislation under Article 355 for the purpose of suo moto deployment of Central forces in the States if and when the situation so demands.

The Commission submitted its report to the government in April 2010. In finalising the 1,456 page report, in seven volumes, the Commission took extensive help from the Sarkaria Commission report, the National Commission to Review the Working of the Constitution (NCRWC) report and the Second Administrative Reforms Commission report. However, in a number of areas, the Commission report differed from the Sarkaria Commission recommendations. 
After examining at length the issues raised in its Terms of Reference and the related aspects in all their hues and shades, the Commission came to the conclusion that ‘cooperative federalism’ will be the key for sustaining India’s unity, integrity and social and economic development in future. The principles of cooperative federalism thus may have to act as a practical guide for Indian polity and governance.
In all, the Commission made over 310 recommendations, touching upon several significant areas in the working of Centre-state relations. The important recommendations are mentioned below:
1. To facilitate effective implementation of the laws on List III subjects, it is necessary that some broad agreement is reached between the Union and states before introducing legislation in Parliament on matters in the Concurrent List.

2. The Union should be extremely restrained in asserting Parliamentary supremacy in matters assigned to the states. Greater flexibility to states in relation to subjects in the State List and “transferred items” in the Concurrent List is the key for better Centre-state relations.

3. The Union should occupy only that many of subjects in concurrent or overlapping jurisdiction which are absolutely necessary to achieve uniformity of policy in demonstrable national interest.

4. There should be a continuing auditing role for the Inter-state Council in the management of matters in concurrent or overlapping jurisdiction.

5. The period of six months prescribed in Article 201 for State Legislature to act when the bill is returned by the President can be made applicable for the President also to decide on assenting or withholding assent to a state bill reserved for consideration of the President.

6. Parliament should make a law on the subject of Entry 14 of List I (treaty making and implementing it through Parliamentary legislation) to streamline the procedures involved. The exercise of the power obviously cannot be absolute or unchartered in view of the federal structure of legislative and executive powers. 

7. Financial obligations and its implications on state finances arising out of treaties and agreements should be a permanent term of reference to the Finance Commissions constituted from time to time.

8. While selecting Governors, the Central Government should adopt the following strict guidelines as recommended in the Sarkaria Commission report and follow its mandate in letter and spirit :
(i) He should be eminent in some walk of life
(ii) He should be a person from outside the state
(iii) He should be a detached figure and not too intimately connected with the local politics of the state
(iv) He should be a person who has not taken too great a part in politics generally and particularly in the recent past

9. Governors should be given a fixed tenure of five years and their removal should not be at the sweet will of the Government at the Centre.

10. The procedure laid down for impeachment of President, mutatis mutandis can be made applicable for impeachment of Governors as well.

11. Article 163 does not give the Governor a general discretionary power to act against or without the advice of his Council of Ministers. In fact, the area for the exercise of discretion is limited and even in this limited area, his choice of action should not be arbitrary or fanciful. It must be a choice dictated by reason, activated by good faith and tempered by caution. 

12. In respect of bills passed by the Legislative Assembly of a state, the Governor should take the decision within six months whether to grant assent or to reserve it for consideration of the President.

13. On the question of Governor’s role in appointment of Chief Minister in the case of an hung assembly, it is necessary to lay down certain clear guidelines to be followed as Constitutional conventions. These guidelines may be as follows: 
(i) The party or combination of parties which commands the wide support in the Legislative Assembly should be called upon to form the Government.
(ii) If there is a pre-poll alliance or coalition, it should be treated one political party and if such coalition obtains a majority, leader of such coalition shall be called by the Governor to form the Government.
(iii) In case no party or pre-poll coalition has a clear majority, Governor should select the Chief Minister in the order preference indicated here.
(a) The group of parties which had pre-poll alliance commanding the largest number
(b) The largest single party staking a claim to form the government with the support of others
(c) A post-electoral coalition with all partners joining the government
(d) A post-electoral alliance with some parties joining the government and the remaining including independents supporting the government from outside

14. On the question of dismissal of a Chief Minister, the Governor should invariably insist on the Chief Minister proving his majority on the floor of the House for which he should prescribe a time limit.

15. The Governor should have the right to sanction for prosecution of a state minister against the advice of the Council of Ministers, if the Cabinet decision appears to the Governor to be motivated by bias in the face of overwhelming material.

16. The convention of Governors acting as Chancellors of Universities and holding other statutory positions should be done away with. His role should be confined to the Constitutional provisions only.

17. When an external aggression or internal disturbance paralyses the state administration creating a situation of a potential break down of the Constitutional machinery of the state, all alternative courses available to the Union for discharging its paramount responsibility under Article 355 should be exhausted to contain the situation and the exercise of the power under Article 356 should be limited strictly to rectifying a “failure of the Constitutional machinery in the state”.

18. On the question of invoking Article 356 in case of failure of Constitutional machinery in states, suitable amendments are required to incorporate the guidelines set forth in the landmark judgement of the Supreme Court in S.R. Bommai V. Union of India (1994). This would remove possible misgivings in this regard on the part of states and help in smoothening Centrestate relations. 

19. Given the strict parameters now set for invoking the emergency provisions under Articles 352 and 356 to be used only as a measure of “last resort”, and the duty of the Union to protect states under Article 355, it is necessary to provide a Constitutional or legal framework to deal with situations which require Central intervention but do not warrant invoking the extreme steps under Articles 352 and 356. Providing the framework for “localised emergency” would ensure that the state government can continue to function and the Assembly would not have to be dissolved while providing a mechanism to let the Central Government respond to the issue specifically and locally. The imposition of local emergency is fully justified under the mandate of Article 355 read with Entry 2A of List I and Entry 1 of List II of the Seventh Schedule.

20. Suitable amendments to Article 263 are required to make the Inter-State Council a credible, powerful and fair mechanism for management of interstate and Centre-state differences. 

21. The Zonal Councils should meet at least twice a year with an agenda proposed by states concerned to maximise co-ordination and promote harmonisation of policies and action having interstate ramification. The Secretariat of a strengthened Inter-State Council can function as the Secretariat of the Zonal Councils as well.

22. The Empowered Committee of Finance Ministers of States proved to be a successful experiment in inter-state coordination on fiscal matters. There is need to institutionalise similar models in other sectors as well. A forum of Chief Ministers, Chaired by one of the Chief Minister by rotation can be similarly thought about particularly to co-ordinate policies of sectors like energy, food, education, environment and health.

23. New all-India services in sectors like health, education, engineering and judiciary should be created.

24. Factors inhibiting the composition and functioning of the Second Chamber as a representative forum of states should be removed or modified even if it requires amendment of the Constitutional provisions. In fact, Rajya Sabha offers immense potential to negotiate acceptable solutions to the friction points which emerge between Centre and states in fiscal, legislative and administrative relations.

25. A balance of power between states inter se is desirable and this is possible by equality of representation in the Rajya Sabha. This requires amendment of the relevant provisions to give equality of seats to states in the Rajya Sabha, irrespective of their population size.

26. The scope of devolution of powers to local bodies to act as institutions of self-government should be constitutionally defined through appropriate amendments. 

27. All future Central legislations involving states’ involvement should provide for cost sharing as in the case of the RTE Act. Existing Central legislations where the states are entrusted with the responsibility of implementation should be suitably amended providing for sharing of costs by the Central Government.

28. The royalty rates on major minerals should be revised at least every three years without any delay. States should be properly compensated for any delay in the revision of royalty beyond three years.

29. The current ceiling on profession tax should be completely done away with by a Constitutional amendment.

30. The scope for raising more revenue from the taxes mentioned in article 268 should be examined afresh. This issue may be either referred to the next Finance Commission or an expert committee be appointed to look into the matter.

31. To bring greater accountability, all fiscal legislations should provide for an annual assessment by an independent body and the reports of these bodies should be laid in both Houses of Parliament/state legislature.

32. Considerations specified in the Terms of Reference (ToR) of the Finance Commission should be even handed as between the Centre and the states. There should be an effective mechanism to involve the states in the finalisation of the ToR of the Finance Commissions.

33. The Central Government should review all the existing cesses and surcharges with a view to bringing down their share in the gross tax revenue.

34. Because of the close linkages between the plan and non-plan expenditure, an expert committee may be appointed to look into the issue of distinction between the plan and non-plan expenditure.

35. There should be much better coordination between the Finance Commission and the Planning Commission. The synchronisation of the periods covered by the Finance Commission and the FiveYear Plan will considerably improve such coordination.

36. The Finance Commission division in the Ministry of Finance should be converted into a full-fledged department, serving as the permanent secretariat for the Finance Commissions.

37. The Planning Commission has a crucial role in the current situation. But its role should be that of coordination rather that of micro managing sectoral plans of the Central ministries and the states.

38. Steps should be taken for the setting up of an Inter-State Trade and Commerce Commission under Article 307 read with Entry

42 of List-I. This Commission should be vested with both advisory and executive roles with decision making powers. As a Constitutional body, the decisions of the Commission should be final and binding on all states as well as the Union of India. Any party aggrieved with the decision of the Commission may prefer an appeal to the Supreme Court.

Inter-State Relations:
The successful functioning of the Indian federal system depends not only on the harmonious relations and close cooperation between the Centre and the states but also between the states inter se. Hence, the Constitution makes the following provisions with regard to inter-state comity:
1. Adjudication of inter-state water disputes.
2. Coordination through inter-state councils.
3. Mutual recognition of public acts, records and judicial proceedings.
4. Freedom of inter-state trade, commerce and intercourse.
In addition, the zonal councils have been established by the Parliament to promote inter-state cooperation and coordination.

INTER-STATE WATER DISPUTES:
Article 262 of the Constitution provides for the adjudication of interstate water disputes. It makes two provisions:
(i) Parliament may by law provide for the adjudication of any dispute or complaint with respect to the use, distribution and control of waters of any inter-state river and river valley.
(ii) Parliament may also provide that neither the Supreme Court nor any other court is to exercise jurisdiction in respect of any such dispute or complaint.
Under this provision, the Parliament has enacted two laws [the River Boards Act (1956) and the Inter-State Water Disputes Act (1956)]. The River Boards Act provides for the establishment of river boards for the regulation and development of inter-state river and river valleys. A river board is established by the Central government on the request of the state governments concerned to advise them.

The Inter-State Water Disputes Act empowers the Central government to set up an ad hoc tribunal for the adjudication of a dispute between two or more states in relation to the waters of an inter-state river or river valley. The decision of the tribunal would be final and binding on the parties to the dispute. Neither the Supreme Court nor any other court is to have jurisdiction in respect of any water dispute which may be referred to such a tribunal under this Act.

The need for an extra judicial machinery to settle inter-state water disputes is as follows: “The Supreme Court would indeed have jurisdiction to decide any dispute between states in connection with water supplies, if legal rights or interests are concerned; but the experience of most countries has shown that rules of law based upon the analogy of private proprietary interests in water do not afford a satisfactory basis for settling disputes between the states where the interests of the public at large in the proper use of water supplies are involved.”  
So far (2019), the Central government has set up nine inter-state water dispute tribunals. 

INTER-STATE COUNCILS:
Article 263 contemplates the establishment of an Inter-State Council to effect coordination between the states and between Centre and states. Thus, the President can establish such a council if at any time it appears to him that the public interest would be served by its establishment. He can define the nature of duties to be performed by such a council and its organisation and procedure. Even though the president is empowered to define the duties of an inter-state council, Article 263 specifies the duties that can be assigned to it in the following manner:
(a) enquiring into and advising upon disputes which may arise between states;
(b) investigating and discussing subjects in which the states or the Centre and the states have a common interest; and
(c) making recommendations upon any such subject, and particularly for the better co-ordination of policy and action on it.

“The council’s function to enquire and advice upon inter-state disputes is complementary to the Supreme Court’s jurisdiction under Article 131 to decide a legal controversy between the governments. The Council can deal with any controversy whether legal or nonlegal, but its function is advisory unlike that of the court which gives a binding decision.”
Under the above provisions of Article 263, the president has established the following councils to make recommendations for the better coordination of policy and action in the related subjects:
• Central Council of Health and Family Welfare.
• Central Council of Local Government
• Four Regional Councils for Sales Tax for the Northern, Eastern, Western and Southern Zones.

Establishment of Inter-State Council:
The Sarkaria Commission on Centre-State Relations (1983–88) made a strong case for the establishment of a permanent Inter-State Council under Article 263 of the Constitution. It recommended that in
order to differentiate the Inter-State Council from other bodies established under the same Article 263, it must be called as the Inter-Governmental Council. The Commission recommended that the Council should be charged with the duties laid down in clauses (b) and (c) of Article 263.

In pursuance of the above recommendations of the Sarkaria Commission, the Janata Dal Government headed by V. P. Singh established the Inter-State Council in 1990.5 It consists of the following members:
(i) Prime minister as the Chairman
(ii) Chief ministers of all the states
(iii) Chief ministers of union territories having legislative assemblies
(iv) Administrators of union territories not having legislative assemblies
(v) Governors of States under President’s rule
(vi) Six Central cabinet ministers, including the home minister, to be nominated by the Prime Minister.

Five Ministers of Cabinet rank / Minister of State (independent charge) nominated by the Chairman of the Council (i.e., Prime Minister) are permanent invitees to the Council. The council is a recommendatory body on issues relating to interstate, Centre-state and Centre-union territories relations. It aims at promoting coordination between them by examining, discussing and deliberating on such issues. Its duties, in detail, are as follows:
• investigating and discussing such subjects in which the states or the centre have a common interest;
• making recommendations upon any such subject for the better coordination of policy and action on it; and
• deliberating upon such other matters of general interest to the states as may be referred to it by the chairman.

The Council may meet at least thrice in a year. Its meetings are held in camera and all questions are decided by consensus. There is also a Standing Committee of the Council. It was set up in 1996 for continuous consultation and processing of matters for the consideration of the Council. It consists of the following members:
(i) Union Home Minister as the Chairman
(ii) Five Union Cabinet Ministers
(iii) Nine Chief Ministers

The Council is assisted by a secretariat called the Inter-State Council Secretariat. This secretariat was set-up in 1991 and is headed by a secretary to the Government of India. Since 2011, it is also functioning as the secretariat of the Zonal Councils.

PUBLIC ACTS, RECORDS AND JUDICIAL PROCEEDINGS:
Under the Constitution, the jurisdiction of each state is confined to its own territory. Hence, it is possible that the acts and records of one state may not be recognised in another state. To remove any such
difficulty, the Constitution contains the “Full Faith and Credit” clause which lays down the following:
(i) Full faith and credit is to be given throughout the territory of India to public acts, records and judicial proceedings of the Centre and every state. The expression ‘public acts’ includes both legislative and executive acts of the government. The expression ‘public record’ includes any official book, register or record made by a public servant in the discharge of his official duties.
(ii) The manner in which and the conditions under which such acts, records and proceedings are to be proved and their effect determined would be as provided by the laws of Parliament. This means that the general rule mentioned above is subject to the power of Parliament to lay down the mode of proof as well as the effect of such acts, records and proceedings of one state in another state.
(iii) Final judgements and orders of civil courts in any part of India are capable of execution anywhere within India (without the necessity of a fresh suit upon the judgement). 
The rule applies only to civil judgements and not to criminal judgements. In other words, it does not require the courts of a state to enforce the penal laws of another state.

INTER-STATE TRADE AND COMMERCE:
Articles 301 to 307 in Part XIII of the Constitution deal with the trade, commerce and intercourse within the territory of India. Article 301 declares that trade, commerce and intercourse throughout the territory of India shall be free. The object of this provision is to break down the border barriers between the states and to create one unit with a view to encourage the free flow of trade, commerce and intercourse in the country. The freedom under this provision is not confined to interstate trade, commerce and intercourse but also extends to intra-state trade, commerce and intercourse. Thus, Article 301 will be violated whether restrictions are imposed at the frontier of any state or at any prior or subsequent stage.

The freedom guaranteed by Article 301 is a freedom from all restrictions, except those which are provided for in the other provisions (Articles 302 to 305) of Part XIII of the Constitution itself. 
(i) Parliament can impose restrictions on the freedom of trade, commerce and intercourse between the states or within a state in public interest. But, the Parliament cannot give preference
one state over another or discriminate between the state except in the case of scarcity of goods in any part of India.

(ii) The legislature of a state can impose reasonable restrictions the freedom of trade, commerce and intercourse with that state or within that state in public interest. But, a bill for this purpose can be introduced in the legislature only with the previous sanction of the president. Further, the state legislature cannnot give preference to one state over another or discriminate between the states.

(iii) The legislature of a state can impose on goods imported from other states or the union territories any tax to which similar goods manufactured in that state are subject. This provision prohibits the imposition of discriminatory taxes by the state.

(iv) The freedom (under Article 301) is subject to the nationalisation laws (i.e., laws providing for monopolies in favour of the Centre or the states). 
Thus, the Parliament or the state legislature can make laws for the carrying on by the respective government any trade, business, industry or service, whether to exclusion, complete or partial, of citizens or otherwise.

The Parliament can appoint an appropriate authority for carrying out the purposes of the above provisions relating to the freedom of trade, commerce and intercourse and restrictions on it. The Parliament can also confer on that authority the necessary powers and duties. But, no such authority has been appointed so far.

ZONAL COUNCILS:
The Zonal Councils are the statutory (and not the constitutional) bodies. They are established by an Act of the Parliament, that is, States Reorganisation Act of 1956. The act divided the country into five zones (Northern, Central, Eastern, Western and Southern) and provided a zonal council for each zone. While forming these zones, several factors have been taken into account which include: the natural divisions of the country, the river systems and means of communication, the cultural and linguistic affinity and the requirements of economic development, security and law and order.

Each zonal council consists of the following members: 
(a) home minister of Central government. 
(b) chief ministers of all the States in the zone. 
(c) Two other ministers from each state in the zone. 
(d) Administrator of each union territory in the zone.
Besides, the following persons can be associated with the zonal council as advisors (i.e., without the right to vote in the meetings):
(i) a person nominated by the Planning Commission; 
(ii) chief
secretary of the government of each state in the zone; and
 (iii) development commissioner of each state in the zone.
 
The home minister of Central government is the common chairman of the five zonal councils. Each chief minister acts as a vice-chairman of the council by rotation, holding office for a period of one year at a time. The zonal councils aim at promoting cooperation and coordination between states, union territories and the Centre. They discuss and make recommendations regarding matters like economic and social planning, linguistic minorities, border disputes, interstate transport, and so on. They are only deliberative and advisory bodies. The objectives (or the functions) of the zonal councils, in detail, are as follows:
• To achieve an emotional integration of the country.
• To help in arresting the growth of acute state-consciousness, regionalism, lingu-ism and particularistic trends.
• To help in removing the after-effects of separation in some cases so that the process of reorganisation, integration and economic advancement may synchronise.
• To enable the Centre and states to cooperate with each other in social and economic matters and exchange ideas and experience in order to evolve uniform policies.
• To cooperate with each other in the successful and speedy execution of major development projects.
• To secure some kind of political equilibrium between different regions of the country.

North-Eastern Council In addition to the above Zonal Councils, a North-Eastern Council was created by a separate Act of Parliament– the North-Eastern Council Act of 1971.8 Its members include Assam,
Manipur, Mizoram, Arunchal Pradesh, Nagaland, Meghalaya, Tripura and Sikkim.9 Its functions are similar to those of the zonal councils, but with few additions. It has to formulate a unified and coordinated
regional plan covering matters of common importance. It has to review from time to time the measures taken by the member states for the maintenance of security and public order in the region.

Emergency Provisions:
The Emergency provisions are contained in Part XVIII of the Constitution, from Articles 352 to 360. These provisions enable the Central government to meet any abnormal situation effectively. The rationality behind the incorporation of these provisions in the Constitution is to safeguard the sovereignty, unity, integrity and security of the country, the democratic political system, and the Constitution. During an Emergency, the Central government becomes all powerful and the states go into the total control of the Centre. It converts the federal structure into a unitary one without a formal amendment of the Constitution. This kind of transformation of the political system from federal during normal times to unitary during Emergency is a unique feature of the Indian Constitution. 
In this context, Dr. B.R. Ambedkar observed in the Constituent Assembly that1 :
‘All federal systems including American are placed in a tight mould of federalism. No matter what the circumstances, it cannot change its form and shape. It can never be unitary. On the other hand, the Constitution of India can be both unitary as well as federal according to the requirements of time and circumstances. In normal times, it is framed to work as a federal system. But in times of Emergency, it is so designed as to make it work as though it was a unitary system.’

The Constitution stipulates three types of emergencies:
1. An emergency due to war, external aggression or armed rebellion2 (Article 352). This is popularly known as ‘National Emergency’. However, the Constitution employs the expression ‘proclamation of emergency’ to denote an emergency of this type.
2. An Emergency due to the failure of the constitutional machinery in the states (Article 356). This is popularly known as ‘President’s Rule’. It is also known by two other names–‘State Emergency’ or ‘constitutional Emergency’. However, the Constitution does not use the word ‘emergency’ for this situation.
3. Financial Emergency due to a threat to the financial stability or credit of India (Article 360).

NATIONAL EMERGENCY:
Grounds of Declaration national emergency:
Under Article 352, the President can declare a national emergency when the security of India or a part of it is threatened by war or external aggression or armed rebellion. It may be noted that the president can declare a national emergency even before the actual occurrence of war or external aggression or armed rebellion, if he is satisfied that there is an imminent danger. The President can also issue different proclamations on grounds of war, external aggression, armed rebellion, or imminent danger thereof, whether or not there is a proclamation already issued by him and such proclamation is in operation. This provision was added by the 38th Amendment Act of 1975. 
When a national emergency is declared on the ground of ‘war’ or ‘external aggression’, it is known as ‘External Emergency’. On the other hand, when it is declared on the ground of ‘armed rebellion’, it is known as ‘Internal Emergency’.
A proclamation of national emergency may be applicable to the entire country or only a part of it. The 42nd Amendment Act of 1976 enabled the president to limit the operation of a National Emergency to a specified part of India. 

Originally, the Constitution mentioned ‘internal disturbance’ as the third ground for the proclamation of a National Emergency, but the expression was too vague and had a wider connotation. Hence, the 44th Amendment Act of 1978 substituted the words ‘armed rebellion’ for ‘internal disturbance’. Thus, it is no longer possible to declare a National Emergency on the ground of ‘internal disturbance’ as was done in 1975 by the Congress government headed by Indira Gandhi. The President, however, can proclaim a national emergency only after receiving a written recommendation from the cabinet. This means that the emergency can be declared only on the concurrence of the cabinet and not merely on the advice of the prime minister. In 1975, the then Prime Minister, Indira Gandhi advised the president to proclaim emergency without consulting her cabinet. The cabinet was informed of the proclamation after it was made, as a fait accompli. 
The 44th Amendment Act of 1978 introduced this safeguard to eliminate any possibility of the prime minister alone taking a decision in this regard. The 38th Amendment Act of 1975 made the declaration of a
National Emergency immune from the judicial review. But, this provision was subsequently deleted by the 44th Amendment Act of 1978. Further, in the Minerva Mills case4 , (1980), the Supreme Court held that the proclamation of a national emergency can be challenged in a court on the ground of malafide or that the declaration was based on wholly extraneous and irrelevant facts or is absurd or perverse.

Parliamentary Approval and Duration:
The proclamation of Emergency must be approved by both the Houses of Parliament within one month from the date of its issue. Originally, the period allowed for approval by the Parliament was two months, but was reduced by the 44th Amendment Act of 1978. However, if the proclamation of emergency is issued at a time when the Lok Sabha has been dissolved or the dissolution of the Lok Sabha takes place during the period of one month without approving the proclamation, then the proclamation survives until 30 days from the first sitting of the Lok Sabha after its reconstitution, provided the Rajya Sabha has in the meantime  approved it.
If approved by both the Houses of Parliament, the emergency continues for six months, and can be extended to an indefinite period with an approval of the Parliament for every six months. This provision for periodical parliamentary approval was also added by the 44th Amendment Act of 1978. Before that, the emergency, once approved by the Parliament, could remain in operation as long as the Executive (cabinet) desired. However, if the dissolution of the Lok Sabha takes place during the period of six months without approving the further continuance of Emergency, then the proclamation survives until 30 days from the first sitting of the Lok Sabha after its reconstitution, provided the Rajya Sabha has in the mean-time approved its continuation.

Every resolution approving the proclamation of emergency or its continuance must be passed by either House of Parliament by a special majority, that is, 
(a) a majority of the total membership of that house, and 
(b) a majority of not less than two-thirds of the members of that house present and voting. This special majority provision was introduced by the 44th Amendment Act of 1978. Previously, such resolution could be passed by a simple majority of the Parliament.

Revocation of Proclamation:
A proclamation of emergency may be revoked by the President at any time by a subsequent proclamation. Such a proclamation does not require the parliamentary approval. Further, the President must revoke a proclamation if the Lok Sabha passes a resolution disapproving its continuation. Again, this safeguard was introduced by the 44th Amendment Act of 1978. Before the amendment, a proclamation could be revoked by the president on his own and the Lok Sabha had no control in this regard.
The 44th Amendment Act of 1978 also provided that, where one-tenth of the total number of members of the Lok Sabha give a written notice to the Speaker (or to the president if the House is
not in session), a special sitting of the House should be held within 14 days for the purpose of considering a resolution disapproving the continuation of the proclamation. A resolution of disapproval is different from a resolution approving the continuation of a proclamation in the following two respects:
1. The first one is required to be passed by the Lok Sabha only, while the second one needs to be passed by the both Houses of Parliament.
2. The first one is to be adopted by a simple majority only, while the second one needs to be adopted by a special majority.

Effects of National Emergency:
A proclamation of Emergency has drastic and wide ranging effects on the political system. These consequences can be grouped into three categories:
1. Effect on the Centre-state relations,
2. Effect on the life of the Lok Sabha and State assembly, and
3. Effect on the Fundamental Rights.

Effect of National Emergency on the Centre-State Relations:
While a proclamation of Emergency is in force, the normal fabric of the Centre-state relations undergoes a basic change. This can be studied under three heads, namely, executive, legislative and financial.
(a) Executive During a national emergency, the executive power of the Centre extends to directing any state regarding the manner in which its executive power is to be exercised. In normal times, the Centre can give executive directions to a state only on certain specified matters. However, during a national emergency, the Centre becomes entitled to give executive directions to a state on ‘any’ matter. Thus, the state governments are brought under the complete control of the Centre, though they are not suspended.
(b) Legislative During a national emergency, the Parliament becomes empowered to make laws on any subject mentioned in the State List. Although the legislative power of a state legislature is not suspended, it becomes subject to the overriding power of the Parliament. Thus, the normal distribution of the legislative powers between the Centre and states is suspended, though the state Legislatures are not suspended. 

In brief, the Constitution becomes unitary rather than federal. The laws made by Parliament on the state subjects during a National Emergency become inoperative six months after the emergency has ceased to operate. Notably, while a proclamation of national emergency is in operation, the President can issue ordinances on the state subjects also, if the Parliament is not in session. Further, the Parliament can confer powers and impose duties upon the Centre or its officers and authorities in respect of matters outside the Union List, in order to carry out the laws made by it under its extended jurisdiction as a result of the proclamation of a National Emergency.
The 42nd Amendment Act of 1976 provided that the two consequences mentioned above (executive and legislative) extends not only to a state where the Emergency is in operation but also to any other state. 

(c) Financial While a proclamation of national emergency is in operation, the President can modify the constitutional distribution of revenues between the centre and the states. This means that the president can either reduce or cancel the transfer of finances from Centre to the states. Such modification continues till the end of the financial year in which the Emergency ceases to operate. Also, every such order of the President has to be laid before both the Houses of Parliament.

Effect on the Life of the Lok Sabha and State Assembly:
While a proclamation of National Emergency is in operation, the life of the Lok Sabha may be extended beyond its normal term (five years) by a law of Parliament for one year at a time (for any length of time). However, this extension cannot continue beyond a period of six months after the emergency has ceased to operate. For example, the term of the Fifth Lok Sabha (1971–1977) was extended two times by one year at a time.
Similarly, the Parliament may extend the normal tenure of a state legislative assembly (five years) by one year each time (for any length of time) during a national emergency, subject to a maximum period of six months after the Emergency has ceased to operate.

Effect on the Fundamental Rights:
Articles 358 and 359 describe the effect of a National Emergency on the Fundamental Rights. Article 358 deals with the suspension of the Fundamental Rights guaranteed by Article 19, while Article 359 deals with the suspension of other Fundamental Rights (except those guaranteed by Articles 20 and 21). These two provisions are:
(a) Suspension of Fundamental Rights under Article 19–
According to Article 358, when a proclamation of national emergency is made, the six Fundamental Rights under Article 19 are automatically suspended. No separate order for their suspension is required.
While a proclamation of national emergency is in operation, the state is freed from the restrictions imposed by Article 19. In other words, the state can make any law or can take any executive action abridging or taking away the six Fundamental Rights guaranteed by Article 19. Any such law or executive action cannot be challenged on the ground that they are inconsistent with the six Fundamental Rights guaranteed by Article 19. When the National Emergency ceases to operate, Article 19 automatically revives and comes into force. Any law made during Emergency, to the extent of inconsistency with Article 19, ceases to have effect. 
However, no remedy lies for anything done during the Emergency even after the Emergency expires. This means that the legislative and executive actions taken during the emergency cannot be challenged even after the Emergency ceases to operate. 
The 44th Amendment Act of 1978 restricted the scope of Article 358 in two ways. Firstly, the six Fundamental Rights under Article 19 can be suspended only when the National Emergency is declared on the ground of war or external aggression and not on the ground of armed rebellion. Secondly, only those laws which are related with the Emergency are protected from being challenged and not other laws. Also, the executive action taken only under such a law is protected.

(b) Suspension of other Fundamental Rights–
Article 359 authorises the president to suspend the right to move any court for the enforcement of Fundamental Rights during a National Emergency. This means that under Article 359, the Fundamental Rights as such are not suspended, but only their enforcement. The said rights are theoretically alive but the right to seek remedy is suspended. The suspension of enforcement relates to only those Fundamental Rights that are specified in the Presidential Order. Further, the suspension could be for the period during the operation of emergency or for a shorter period as mentioned in the order, and the suspension order may extend to the whole or any part of the country. It should be laid before eachHouse of Parliament for approval.

While a Presidential Order is in force, the State can make any law or can take any executive action abridging or taking away the specified Fundamental Rights. Any such law or executive action cannot be challenged on the ground that they are inconsistent with the specified Fundamental Rights. When the Order ceases to operate, any law so made, to the extent of inconsistency with the specified Fundamental Rights, ceases to have effect. But no remedy lies for anything done during the operation of the order even after the order ceases to operate. This means that the legislative and executive actions taken during the operation of the Order cannot be challenged even after the Order expires. 

The 44th Amendment Act of 1978 restricted the scope of Article 359 in two ways. Firstly, the President cannot suspend the right to move the Court for the enforcement of fundamental rights guaranteed by Articles 20 to 21. In other words, the right to protection in respect of conviction for offences (Article 20) and the right to life and personal liberty (Article 21) remain enforceable even during emergency. Secondly, only those laws which are related with the emergency are protected from being challenged and not other laws and the executive action taken only under such a law, is protected.

Distinction Between Articles 358 and 359:
The differences between Articles 358 and 359 can be summarised as follows:
1. Article 358 is confined to Fundamental Rights under Article 19 only whereas Article 359 extends to all those Fundamental Rights whose enforcement is suspended by the Presidential Order.
2. Article 358 automatically suspends the fundamental rights under Article 19 as soon as the emergency is declared. On the other hand, Article 359 does not automatically suspend any Fundamental Right. It only empowers the president to suspend the enforcement of the specified Fundamental Rights.
3. Article 358 operates only in case of External Emergency (that is, when the emergency is declared on the grounds of war or external aggression) and not in the case of Internal Emergency (ie, when the Emergency is declared on the ground of armed rebellion). Article 359, on the other hand, operates in case of both External Emergency as well as Internal Emergency. 
4. Article 358 suspends Fundamental Rights under Article 19 for the entire duration of Emergency while Article 359 suspends the enforcement of Fundamental Rights for a period specified by the president which may either be the entire duration of Emergency or a shorter period.
5. Article 358 extends to the entire country whereas Article 359 may extend to the entire country or a part of it.
6. Article 358 suspends Article 19 completely while Article 359 does not empower the suspension of the enforcement of Articles 20 and 21.
7. Article 358 enables the State to make any law or take any executive action inconsistent with Fundamental Rights under Article 19 while Article 359 enables the State to make any law or take any executive action inconsistent with those Fundamental Rights whose enforcement is suspended by the Presidential Order.

There is also a similarity between Article 358 and Article 359. Both provide immunity from challenge to only those laws which are related with the Emergency and not other laws. Also, the executive action taken only under such a law is protected by both.

Declarations Made So Far:
National Emergency has been proclaimed three times so far– in 1962, 1971 and 1975.
The first proclamation of National Emergency was issued in October 1962 on account of Chinese aggression in the NEFA (North-East Frontier Agency–now Arunachal Pradesh), and was in force till January 1968. Hence, a fresh proclamation was not needed at the time of war against Pakistan in 1965. 
The second proclamation of national emergency was made in December 1971 in the wake of attack by Pakistan. Even when this Emergency was in operation, a third proclamation of National Emergency was made in June 1975. Both the second and third proclamations were revoked in March 1977.

The first two proclamations (1962 and 1971) were made on the ground of ‘external aggression’, while the third proclamation (1975) was made on the ground of ‘internal disturbance’, that is, certain persons have been inciting the police and the armed forces against the discharge of their duties and their normal functioning.

The Emergency declared in 1975 (internal emergency) proved to be the most controversial. There was widespread criticism of the misuse of Emergency powers. In the elections held to the Lok Sabha in 1977 after the Emergency, the Congress Party led by Indira Gandhi lost and the Janta Party came to power. This government appointed the Shah Commission to investigate the circumstances that warranted the declaration of an Emergency in 1975. The commission did not justify the declaration of the Emergency. Hence, the 44th Amendment Act was enacted in 1978 to introduce a number of safeguards against the misuse of Emergency provisions.

PRESIDENT’S RULE:
Grounds of Imposition of President Rule:
Article 355 imposes a duty on the Centre to ensure that the government of every state is carried on in accordance with the provisions of the Constitution. It is this duty in the performance of which the Centre takes over the government of a state under Article 356 in case of failure of constitutional machinery in state. This is popularly known as ‘President’s Rule’. It is also known as ‘State Emergency’ or ‘Constitutional Emergency’.
The President’s Rule can be proclaimed under Article 356 on two grounds–one mentioned in Article 356 itself and another in Article 365:
1. Article 356 empowers the President to issue a proclamation, if he is satisfied that a situation has arisen in which the government of a state cannot be carried on in accordance with the provisions of the Constitution. Notably, the president can act either on a report of the governor of the state or otherwise too (ie, even without the governor’s report). 
2. Article 365 says that whenever a state fails to comply with or to give effect to any direction from the Centre, it will be lawful for the president to hold that a situation has arisen in which the government of the state cannot be carried on in accordance with the provisions of the Constitution.

Parliamentary Approval and Duration:
A proclamation imposing President’s Rule must be approved by both the Houses of Parliament within two months from the date of its issue. However, if the proclamation of President’s Rule is issued at a time when the Lok Sabha has been dissolved or the dissolution of the Lok Sabha takes place during the period of two months without approving the proclamation, then the proclamation survives until 30 days from the first sitting of the Lok Sabha after its reconstitution, provided the Rajya Sabha approves it in the mean time.

If approved by both the Houses of Parliament, the President’s Rule continues for six months6. It can be extended for a maximum period of three years with the approval of the Parliament, every six months. However, if the dissolution of the Lok Sabha takes place during the period of six months without approving the further continuation of the President’s Rule, then the proclamation survives until 30 days from the first sitting of the Lok Sabha after its reconstitution, provided the Rajya Sabha has in the meantime approved its continuance. Every resolution approving the proclamation of President’s Rule
or its continuation can be passed by either House of Parliament only by a simple majority, that is, a majority of the members of that House present and voting.

The 44th Amendment Act of 1978 introduced a new provision to put restraint on the power of Parliament to extend a proclamation of President’s Rule beyond one year. Thus, it provided that, beyond one year, the President’s Rule can be extended by six months at a time only when the following two conditions are fulfilled:
1. a proclamation of National Emergency should be in operation in the whole of India, or in the whole or any part of the state; and
2. the Election Commission must certify that the general elections to the legislative assembly of the concerned state cannot be held on account of difficulties.
A proclamation of President’s Rule may be revoked by the President at any time by a subsequent proclamation. Such a proclamation does not require the parliamentary approval. 

Consequences of President’s Rule:
The President acquires the following extraordinary powers when the President’s Rule is imposed in a state:
1. He can take up the functions of the state government and powers vested in the governor or any other executive authority in the state.
2. He can declare that the powers of the state legislature are to be exercised by the Parliament.
3. He can take all other necessary steps including the suspension of the constitutional provisions relating to any body or authority in the state.

Therefore, when the President’s Rule is imposed in a state, the President dismisses the state council of ministers headed by the chief minister. The state governor, on behalf of the President, carries on the state administration with the help of the chief secretary of the state or the advisors appointed by the President. This is the reason why a proclamation under Article 356 is popularly known as the imposition of ‘President’s Rule’ in a state.
Further, the President either suspends or dissolves the state legislative assembly8. The Parliament passes the state legislative bills and the state budget. When the state legislature is thus suspended or dissolved:
1. the Parliament can delegate the power to make laws for the state to the President or to any other authority specified by him in this regard,
2. the Parliament or in case of delegation, the President or any other specified authority can make laws conferring powers and imposing duties on the Centre or its officers and authorities,
3. the President can authorise, when the Lok Sabha is not in session, expenditure from the state consolidated fund pending its sanction by the Parliament, and
4. the President can promulgate, when the Parliament is not in session, ordinances for the governance of the state. 

A law made by the Parliament or president or any other specified authority continues to be operative even after the President’s Rule. This means that the period for which such a law remains in force is not coterminous with the duration of the proclamation. But it can be repealed or altered or re-enacted by the state legislature.
It should be noted here that the President cannot assume to himself the powers vested in the concerned state high court or suspend the provisions of the Constitution relating to it. In other words, the constitutional position, status, powers and functions of the concerned state high court remain same even during the President’s Rule.

Use of Article 356:
Since 1950, the President’s Rule has been imposed on more than 125 occasions, that is, on an average twice a year. Further, on a number of occasions, the President’s Rule has been imposed in an arbitrary manner for political or personal reasons. Hence, Article 356 has become one of the most controversial and most criticised provision of the Constitution. 
For the first time, the President’s Rule was imposed in Punjab in 1951. By now, all most all the states have been brought under the President’s Rule, once or twice or more. 

When general elections were held to the Lok Sabha in 1977 after the internal emergency, the ruling Congress Party lost and the Janta Party came to power. The new government headed by Morarji Desai imposed President’s Rule in nine states (where the Congress Party was in power) on the ground that the assemblies in those states no longer represented the wishes of the electorate. When the Congress Party returned to power in 1980, it did the same in nine states10 on the same ground. 

In 1992, President’s Rule was imposed in three BJP-ruled states (Madhya Pradesh, Himachal Pradesh and Rajasthan) by the Congress Party on the ground that they were not implementing sincerely the ban imposed by the Centre on religious organisations. In a landmark judgement in Bommai case (1994), the Supreme Court upheld the validity of this proclamation on the ground that secularism is a ‘basic feature’ of the Constitution. But, the court did not uphold the validity of the imposition of the President’s Rule in Nagaland in 1988, Karnataka in 1989 and Meghalaya in 1991.

Dr. B.R. Ambedkar, while replying to the critics of this provision in the Constituent Assembly, hoped that the drastic power conferred by Article 356 would remain a ‘deadletter’ and would be used only as a measure of last resort. He observed: “The intervention of the Centre must be deemed to be barred, because that would be an invasion on the sovereign authority of the province (state). That is a fundamental proposition which we must accept by reason of the fact that we have a Federal Constitution. That being so, if the Centre is to interfere in the administration of provincial affairs, it must be under some obligation which the Constitution imposes upon the Centre. The proper thing we ought to expect is that such Articles will never be called into operation and that they would remain a deadletter. If at all they are brought into operation, I hope the President who is endowed with this power will take proper precautions before actually suspending the administration of the province.”
However, the subsequent events show that what was hoped to be a ‘dead-letter’ of the Constitution has turned to be a ‘deadly weapon’ against a number of state governments and legislative
assemblies. In this context, H.V. Kamath, a member of the Constituent Assembly commented a decade ago: ‘Dr. Ambedkar is dead and the Articles are very much alive’.

Scope of Judicial Review:
The 38th Amendment Act of 1975 made the satisfaction of the President in invoking Article 356 final and conclusive which could not be challenged in any court on any ground. But, this provision was subsequently deleted by the 44th Amendment Act of 1978 implying that the satisfaction of the President is not beyond judicial review.

In Bommai case (1994), the following propositions have been laid down by the Supreme Court on imposition of President’s Rule in a state under Article 356:
1. The presidential proclamation imposing President’s Rule is subject to judicial review.
2. The satisfaction of the President must be based on relevant material. The action of the president can be struck down by the court if it is based on irrelevant or extraneous grounds or if it was found to be malafide or perverse.
3. Burden lies on the Centre to prove that relevant material exist to justify the imposition of the President’s Rule.
4. The court cannot go into the correctness of the material or its adequacy but it can see whether it is relevant to the action.
5. If the court holds the presidential proclamation to be unconstitutional and invalid, it has power to restore the dismissed state government and revive the state legislative assembly if it was suspended or dissolved.
6. The state legislative assembly should be dissolved only after the Parliament has approved the presidential proclamation. Until such approval is given, the president can only suspend the assembly. In case the Parliament fails to approve the proclamation, the assembly would get reactivated.
7. Secularism is one of the ‘basic features’ of the Constitution. Hence, a state government pursuing anti-secular politics is liable to action under Article 356.
8. The question of the state government losing the confidence of the legislative assembly should be decided on the floor of the House and until that is done the ministry should not be unseated.
9. Where a new political party assumes power at the Centre, it will not have the authority to dismiss ministries formed by other parties in the states.
10. The power under Article 356 is an exceptional power and should be used only occassionally to meet the requirements of special situations.

Cases of Proper and Improper Use of  President’s Rule:
Based on the report of the Sarkaria Commission on Centre-state Relations (1988), the Supreme Court in Bommai case (1994) enlisted the situations where the exercise of power under Article 356 could be proper or improper. Imposition of President’s Rule in a state would be proper in the following situations:
1. Where after general elections to the assembly, no party secures a majority, that is, ‘Hung Assembly’.
2. Where the party having a majority in the assembly declines to form a ministry and the governor cannot find a coalition ministry commanding a majority in the assembly.
3. Where a ministry resigns after its defeat in the assembly and no other party is willing or able to form a ministry commanding a majority in the assembly.
4. Where a constitutional direction of the Central government is disregarded by the state government.
5. Internal subversion where, for example, a government is deliberately acting against the Constitution and the law or is fomenting a violent revolt.
6. Physical breakdown where the government wilfully refuses to discharge its constitutional obligations endangering the security of the state.

The imposition of President’s Rule in a state would be improper under the following situations:
1. Where a ministry resigns or is dismissed on losing majority support in the assembly and the governor recommends imposition of President’s Rule without probing the possibility of forming an alternative ministry. 
2. Where the governor makes his own assessment of the support of a ministry in the assembly and recommends imposition of President’s Rule without allowing the ministry to prove its majority on the floor of the Assembly.
3. Where the ruling party enjoying majority support in the assembly has suffered a massive defeat in the general elections to the Lok Sabha such as in 1977 and 1980.
4. Internal disturbances not amounting to internal subversion or physical breakdown.
5. Maladministration in the state or allegations of corruption against the minis-tryor stringent financial exigencies of the state.
6. Where the state government is not given prior warning to rectify itself except in case of extreme urgency leading to disastrous consequences.
7. Where the power is used to sort out intraparty problems of the ruling party, or for a purpose extraneous or irrelevant to the one for which it has been conferred by the Constitution.

FINANCIAL EMERGENCY:
Grounds of Declaration of Financial Emergence:
Article 360 empowers the president to proclaim a Financial Emergency if he is satisfied that a situation has arisen due to which the financial stability or credit of India or any part of its territory is threatened.
The 38th Amendment Act of 1975 made the satisfaction of the president in declaring a Financial Emergency final and conclusive and not questionable in any court on any ground. But, this provision was subsequently deleted by the 44th Amendment Act of 1978 implying that the satisfaction of the president is not beyond judicial review.

Parliamentary Approval and Duration:
A proclamation declaring financial emergency must be approved by both the Houses of Parliament within two months from the date of its issue. However, if the proclamation of Financial Emergency is issued at a time when the Lok Sabha has been dissolved or the dissolution of the Lok Sabha takes place during the period of two months without approving the proclamation, then the proclamation survives until 30 days from the first sitting of the Lok Sabha after its reconstitution, provided the Rajya Sabha has in the meantime approved it.

Once approved by both the Houses of Parliament, the Financial Emergency continues indefinitely till it is revoked. This implies two things:
1. there is no maximum period prescribed for its operation; and
2. repeated parliamentary approval is not required for its continuation.
A resolution approving the proclamation of financial emergency can be passed by either House of Parliament only by a simple majority, that is, a majority of the members of that house present and voting.
A proclamation of Financial Emergency may be revoked by the president at anytime by a subsequent proclamation. Such a proclamation does not require the parliamentary approval.

Effects of Financial Emergency:
The consequences of the proclamation of a Financial Emergency are as follows:
1. The executive authority of the Centre extends to the giving of 
(a) directions to any state to observe such canons of financial propriety as may be specified in the directions; and
(b) such other directions to any state as the President may deem necessary and adequate for the purpose.

2. Any such direction may include a provision requiring 
(a) the reduction of salaries and allowances of all or any class of persons serving in the state; and 
(b) the reservation of all money bills or other financial bills for the consideration of the President after they are passed by the legislature of the state.

3. The President may issue directions for the reduction of salaries and allowances of 
(a) all or any class of persons serving the Union; and 
(b) the judges of the Supreme Court and the high court.
Thus, during the operation of a financial emergency, the Centre acquires full control over the states in financial matters. 
H.N. Kunzru, a member of the Constituent Assembly, stated that the financial emergency provisions pose a serious threat to the financial autonomy of the states. Explaining the reasons for their inclusion in the Constitution, Dr. B.R. Ambedkar observed in the Constituent Assembly14: “This Article more or less follows the pattern of what is called the National Recovery Act of the United States passed in 1933, which gave the president power to make similar provisions in order to remove the difficulties, both economical and financial, that had overtaken the American people, as a result of the Great Depression.”

No Financial Emergency has been declared so far, though there was a financial crisis in 1991.

CRITICISM OF THE EMERGENCY PROVISIONS:
Some members of the Constituent Assembly criticised the incorporation of emergency provisions in the Constitution on the following grounds:
1. ‘The federal character of the Constitution will be destroyed and the Union will become all powerful.
2. The powers of the State–both the Union and the units–will entirely be concentrated in the hands of the Union executive.
3. The President will become a dictator. 
4. The financial autonomy of the state will be nullified.
5. Fundamental rights will become meaningless and, as a result, the democratic foundations of the Constitution will be destroyed.’

Thus, H.V. Kamath observed: ‘I fear that by this single chapter we are seeking to lay the foundation of a totalitarian state, a police state, a state completely opposed to all the ideals and principles that we have held aloft during the last few decades, a State where the rights and liberties of millions of innocent men and women will be in continuous jeopardy, a State where if there be peace, it will be the peace of the grave and the void of the desert(. . .) It will be a day of shame and sorrow when the President makes use of these Powers having no parallel in any Constitution of the democratic countries of the world’.

K.T. Shah described them as: ‘A chapter of reaction and retrogression. (. . .) I find one cannot but notice two distinct currents of thought underlying and influencing throughout the provisions of this chapter: (a) to arm the Centre with special powers against the units and 
(b) to arm the government against the people . . . 
Looking at all the provisions of this chapter particularly and scrutinising the powers that have been given in almost every article, it seems to me, the name only of liberty or democracy will remain under the Constitution’.

T.T. Krishnamachari feared that ‘by means of these provisions the President and the Executive would be exercising a form of constitutional dictatorship’.

H.N. Kunzru opined that ‘the emergency financial provisions pose a serious threat to the financial autonomy of the States.’ 

However, there were also protagonists of the emergency provisions in the Constituent Assembly. Thus, Sir Alladi Krishnaswami Ayyar labelled them as ‘the very life-breath of the Constitution’. Mahabir Tyagi opined that they would work as a ‘safety-valve’ and thereby help in the maintenance of the Constitution.
While defending the emergency provisions in the Constituent Assembly, Dr. B.R. Ambedkar also accepted the possibility of their misuse. He observed, ‘I do not altogether deny that there is a possibility of the Articles being abused or employed for political purposes’.

CENTRAL GOVERNMENT:
Articles 52 to 78 in Part V of the Constitution deal with the Union executive. The Union executive consists of the President, the VicePresident, the Prime Minister, the council of ministers and the attorney
general of India.

The President:
The President is the head of the Indian State. He is the first citizen of India and acts as the symbol of unity, integrity and solidarity of the nation.

ELECTION OF THE PRESIDENT:
The President is elected not directly by the people but by members of electoral college consisting of:
1. the elected members of both the Houses of Parliament;
2. the elected members of the legislative assemblies of the states; and
3. the elected members of the legislative assemblies of the Union Territories of Delhi and Puducherry.

Thus, the nominated members of both of Houses of Parliament, the nominated members of the state legislative assemblies, the members (both elected and nominated) of the state legislative councils (in case of the bicameral legislature) and the nominated members of the Legislative Assemblies of Delhi and Puducherry do not participate in the election of the President. Where an assembly is dissolved, the
members cease to be qualified to vote in presidential election, even if fresh elections to the dissolved assembly are not held before the presidential election.

The Constitution provides that there shall be uniformity in the scale of representation of different states as well as parity between the states as a whole and the Union at the election of the President. To
achieve this, the number of votes which each elected member of the legislative assembly of each state and the Parliament is entitled to cast at such election shall be determined in the following manner: 
1. Every elected member of the legislative assembly of a state shall have as many votes as there are multiples of one thousand in the quotient obtained by dividing the population of the state by the total number of the elected members of the assembly.

2. Every elected member of either House of Parliament shall have such number of votes as may be obtained by dividing the total number of votes assigned to members of the legislative assemblies of the states by the total number of the elected members of both the Houses of Parliament.

The President’s election is held in accordance with the system of proportional representation by means of the single transferable vote and the voting is by secret ballot. This system ensures that the successful candidate is returned by the absolute majority of votes. A  candidate, in order to be declared elected to the office of President, must secure a fixed quota of votes. The quota of votes is determined
by dividing the total number of valid votes polled by the number of candidates to be elected (here only one candidate is to be elected as President) plus one and adding one to the quotient.

Each member of the electoral college is given only one ballot paper. The voter, while casting his vote, is required to indicate his preferences by marking 1, 2, 3, 4, etc. against the names of candidates. This means that the voter can indicate as many preferences as there are candidates in the fray. In the first phase, the first preference votes are counted. In case a candidate secures the required quota in this phase, he is declared elected. Otherwise, the process of transfer of votes is set in motion. The ballots of the candidate securing the least number of first preference votes are cancelled and his second preference votes are transferred to the first preference votes of other candidates. This process continues till a candidate secures the required quota.

All doubts and disputes in connection with election of the President are inquired into and decided by the Supreme Court whose decision is final. The election of a person as President cannot be challenged on the ground that the electoral college was incomplete (ie, existence of any vacancy among the members of electoral college). If the election of a person as President is declared void by the Supreme Court, acts done by him before the date of such declaration of the Supreme Court are not invalidated and continue to remain in force. 

Some members of the Constituent Assembly criticised the system of indirect election for the President as undemocratic and proposed the idea of direct election. However, the Constitution makers chose
the indirect election due to the following reasons:
1. The indirect election of the President is in harmony with the parliamentary system of government envisaged in the Constitution. Under this system, the President is only a nominal executive and the real powers are vested in the council of ministers headed by the prime minister. It would have been anomalous to have the President elected directly by the people and not give him any real power.
2. The direct election of the President would have been very costly and time- and energy-consuming due to the vast size of the electorate. This is unwarranted keeping in view that he is only a symbolic head.

Some members of the Constituent Assembly suggested that the President should be elected by the members of the two Houses of Parliament alone. The makers of the Constitution did not prefer this as the Parliament, dominated by one political party, would have invariably chosen a candidate from that party and such a President could not represent the states of the Indian Union. The present system makes
the President a representative of the Union and the states equally.
Further, it was pointed out in the Constituent Assembly that the expression ‘proportional representation’ in the case of presidential election is a misnomer. Proportional representation takes place where two or more seats are to be filled. In case of the President, the vacancy is only one. It could better be called a preferential or alternative vote system. Similarly, the expression ‘single transferable vote’ was also objected on the ground that no voter has a single vote; every voter has plural votes.

QUALIFICATIONS, OATH AND CONDITIONS:
Qualifications for Election as President
A person to be eligible for election as President should fulfil the following qualifications:
1. He should be a citizen of India.
2. He should have completed 35 years of age.
3. He should be qualified for election as a member of the Lok Sabha.
4. He should not hold any office of profit under the Union government or any state government or any local authority or any other public authority. 
A sitting President or VicePresident of the Union, the Governor of any state and a minister of the Union or any state is not deemed to hold any office of profit and hence qualified as a presidential candidate.

Further, the nomination of a candidate for election to the office of President must be subscribed by at least 50 electors as proposers and 50 electors as seconders. Every candidate has to make a security
deposit of Rs. 15,000 in the Reserve Bank of India. The security deposit is liable to be forfeited in case the candidate fails to secure one-sixth of the votes polled. Before 1997, number of proposers and seconders was ten each and the amount of security deposit was Rs.2,500. In 1997, they were increased to discourage the non-serious candidates.

Oath or Affirmation by the President:
Before entering upon his office, the President has to make and subscribe to an oath or affirmation. In his oath, the President swears: 
1. to faithfully execute the office;
2. to preserve, protect and defend the Constitution and the law; and
3. to devote himself to the service and well-being of the people of India.

The oath of office to the President is administered by the Chief Justice of India and in his absence, the seniormost judge of the Supreme Court available. Any other person acting as President or discharging the functions of the President also undertakes the similar oath or affirmation.

Conditions of President’s Office:
The Constitution lays down the following conditions of the President’s office:
1. He should not be a member of either House of Parliament or a House of the state legislature. If any such person is elected as President, he is deemed to have vacated his seat in that House on the date on which he enters upon his office as President.
2. He should not hold any other office of profit.
3. He is entitled, without payment of rent, to the use of his official residence (the Rastrapathi Bhavan).
4. He is entitled to such emoluments, allowances and privileges as may be determined by Parliament.
5. His emoluments and allowances cannot be diminished during his term of office.

In 2018, the Parliament increased the salary of the President from Rs. 1.50 lakh to Rs. 5 lakh per month. Earlier in 2008, the pension of the retired President was increased from Rs. 3 lakh per annum to 50% of his salary per month. In addition, the former Presidents are entitled to furnished residence, phone facilities, car, medical treatment, travel facility, secretarial staff and office expenses upto Rs. 1,00,000 per
annum. The spouse of a deceased President is also entitled to a family pension at the rate of 50% of pension of a retired President, furnished residence, phone facility, car, medical treatment, travel facility, secretarial staff and office expenses upto Rs. 20,000 per annum.

The President is entitled to a number of privileges and immunities. He enjoys personal immunity from legal liability for his official acts. During his term of office, he is immune from any criminal proceedings, even in respect of his personal acts. He cannot be arrested or imprisoned. However, after giving two months’ notice, civil proceedings can be instituted against him during his term of office in respect of his personal acts.

TERM, IMPEACHMENT AND VACANCY OF PRESIDENT:
Term of President’s Office:
The President holds office for a term of five years from the date on which he enters upon his office. However, he can resign from his office at any time by addressing the resignation letter to the VicePresident. Further, he can also be removed from the office before completion of his term by the process of impeachment. The President can hold office beyond his term of five years until his successor assumes charge. He is also eligible for re-election to that office. He may be elected for any number of terms. However, in USA, a person cannot be elected to the office of the President more than twice.

Impeachment of President:
The President can be removed from office by a process of impeachment for ‘violation of the Constitution’. However, the Constitution does not define the meaning of the phrase ‘violation of the Constitution’.
The impeachment charges can be initiated by either House of Parliament. These charges should be signed by one-fourth members of the House (that framed the charges), and a 14 days’ notice should
be given to the President. After the impeachment resolution is passed by a majority of two-thirds of the total membership of that House, it is sent to the other House, which should investigate the charges. The
President has the right to appear and to be represented at such investigation. If the other House also sustains the charges and passes the impeachment resolution by a majority of two-thirds of the total
membership, then the President stands removed from his office from the date on which the resolution is so passed.
Thus, an impeachment is a quasi-judicial procedure in the Parliament. In this context, two things should be noted: 
(a) the nominated members of either House of Parliament can participate in the impeachment of the President though they do not participate in his election;
(b) the elected members of the legislative assemblies of states and the Union Territories of Delhi and Puducherry do not participate in the impeachment of the President though they participate in his election.

No President has so far been impeached.

Vacancy in the President’s Office:
A vacancy in the President’s office can occur in any of the following ways:
1. On the expiry of his tenure of five years.
2. By his resignation.
3. On his removal by the process of impeachment.
4. By his death.
5. Otherwise, for example, when he becomes disqualified to hold office or when his election is declared void.

When the vacancy is going to be caused by the expiration of the term of the sitting President, an election to fill the vacancy must be held before the expiration of the term. In case of any delay in conducting the election of new President by any reason, the outgoing President continues to hold office (beyond his term of five years) until his successor assumes charge. This is provided by the Constitution in order to prevent an ‘interregnum’. In this situation, the VicePresident does not get the opportunity to act as President or to discharge the functions of the President.

If the office falls vacant by resignation, removal, death or otherwise, then election to fill the vacancy should be held within six months from the date of the occurrence of such a vacancy. The newly-elected President remains in office for a full term of five years from the date he assumes charge of his office. When a vacancy occurs in the office of the President due to his resignation, removal, death or otherwise, the Vice-President acts as the President until a new President is elected. Further, when the sitting President is unable to discharge his functions due to absence, illness or any other cause, the Vice-President discharges his functions until the President resumes his office.
In case the office of Vice-President is vacant, the Chief Justice of India (or if his office is also vacant, the seniormost judge of the Supreme Court available) acts as the President or discharges the functions of the President.
When any person, ie, Vice-President, chief justice of India, or the seniormost judge of the Supreme Court is acting as the President or discharging the functions of the President, he enjoys all the powers and immunities of the President and is entitled to such emoluments, allowances and privileges as are determined by the Parliament. 

POWERS AND FUNCTIONS OF THE PRESIDENT:
The powers enjoyed and the functions performed by the President can be stated under the following heads.
1. Executive powers
2. Legislative powers
3. Financial powers
4. Judicial powers
5. Diplomatic powers
6. Military powers
7. Emergency powers

Executive Powers of the President:
The executive powers and functions of the President are:
(a) All executive actions of the Government of India are formally taken in his name.
(b) He can make rules specifying the manner in which the orders and other instruments made and executed in his name shall be authenticated.
(c) He can make rules for more convenient transaction of business of the Union government, and for allocation of the said business among the ministers.
(d) He appoints the prime minister and the other ministers. They hold office during his pleasure.
(e) He appoints the attorney general of India and determines his remuneration. The attorney general holds office during the pleasure of the President.
(f) He appoints the comptroller and auditor general of India, the chief election commissioner and other election commissioners, the chairman and members of the Union Public Service Commission, the governors of states, the chairman and members of finance commission, and so on.
(g) He can seek any information relating to the administration of affairs of the Union, and proposals for legislation from the prime minister.
(h) He can require the Prime Minister to submit, for consideration of the council of ministers, any matter on which a decision has been taken by a minister but, which has not been considered by the council.
(i) He can appoint a commission to investigate into the conditions of SCs, STs and other backward classes.
(j) He can appoint an inter-state council to promote Centre-state and inter-state cooperation.
(k) He directly administers the union territories through administrators appointed by him.
(l) He can declare any area as scheduled area and has powers with respect to the administration of scheduled areas and tribal areas.

Legislative Powers of the President:
The President is an integral part of the Parliament of India, and enjoys the following legislative powers.
(a) He can summon or prorogue the Parliament and dissolve the Lok Sabha. He can also summon a joint sitting of both the Houses of Parliament, which is presided over by the Speaker of the Lok Sabha.
(b) He can address the Parliament at the commencement of the first session after each general election and the first session of each year.
(c) He can send messages to the Houses of Parliament, whether with respect to a bill pending in the Parliament or otherwise.
(d) He can appoint any member of the Lok Sabha to preside over its proceedings when the offices of both the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker fall vacant. Similarly, he can also appoint any member of the Rajya Sabha to preside over its proceedings when the offices of both the Chairman and the Deputy Chairman fall vacant.
(e) He nominates 12 members of the Rajya Sabha from amongst persons having special knowledge or practical experience in literature, science, art and social service.
(f) He can nominate two members to the Lok Sabha from the AngloIndian Community.
(g) He decides on questions as to disqualifications of members of the Parliament, in consultation with the Election Commission.
(h) His prior recommendation or permission is needed to introduce certain types of bills in the Parliament. For example, a bill involving expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India, or a bill for the alteration of boundaries of states or creation of a new state.
(i) When a bill is sent to the President after it has been passed by the Parliament, he can: 
(i) give his assent to the bill, or
(ii) withhold his assent to the bill, or
(iii) return the bill (if it is not a money bill) for reconsideration of Parliament. However, if the bill is passed again by the Parliament, with or without amendments, the President has to give his assent to the bill.
(j) When a bill passed by a state legislature is reserved by the governor for consideration of the President, the President can:
(i) give his assent to the bill, or
(ii) withhold his assent to the bill, or
(iii) direct the governor to return the bill (if it is not a money bill) reconsideration of the state legislature. It should be noted that it is not obligatory for the President to give his assent when the bill is again passed by the state legislature and sent again him for his consideration.
(k) He can promulgate ordinances when the Parliament is not in session. These ordinances must be approved by the Parliament within six weeks from its reassembly. He can also withdraw an ordinance at any time. 
(l) He lays the reports of the Comptroller and Auditor General, Union Public Service Commission, Finance Commission, and others, before the Parliament. 
(m) He can make regulations for the peace, progress and good government of the Andaman and Nicobar Islands, Lakshadweep, Dadra and Nagar Haveli, Daman and Diu and Ladakh. In the case of Puducherry also, the President can legislate by making regulations but only when the assembly is suspended or dissolved.

Financial Powers of the President:
The financial powers and functions of the President are:
(a) Money bills can be introduced in the Parliament only with his prior recommendation.
(b) He causes to be laid before the Parliament the annual financial statement (ie, the Union Budget).
(c) No demand for a grant can be made except on his recommendation.
(d) He can make advances out of the contingency fund of India to meet any unforeseen expenditure.
(e) He constitutes a finance commission after every five years to recommend the distribution of revenues between the Centre and the states.

Judicial Powers of the President:
The judicial powers and functions of the President are:
(a) He appoints the Chief Justice and the judges of Supreme Court and high courts.
(b) He can seek advice from the Supreme Court on any question of law or fact. However, the advice tendered by the Supreme Court is not binding on the President.
(c) He can grant pardon, reprieve, respite and remission of punishment, or suspend, remit or commute the sentence of any person convicted of any offence:
(i) In all cases where the punishment or sentence is by martial;
(ii) In all cases where the punishment or sentence is for an offence against a Union law; and
(iii) In all cases where the sentence is a sentence of death.

Diplomatic Powers of the President:
The international treaties and agreements are negotiated and concluded on behalf of the President. However, they are subject to the approval of the Parliament. He represents India in international forums
and affairs and sends and receives diplomats like ambassadors, high commissioners, and so on.

Military Powers of the President:
He is the supreme commander of the defence forces of India. In that capacity, he appoints the chiefs of the Army, the Navy and the Air Force. He can declare war or conclude peace, subject to the approval
of the Parliament.

Emergency Powers of the President:
In addition to the normal powers mentioned above, the Constitution confers extraordinary powers on the President to deal with the following three types of emergencies:
(a) National Emergency (Article 352);
(b) President’s Rule (Article 356 & 365); and
(c) Financial Emergency (Article 360)

VETO POWER OF THE PRESIDENT:
A bill passed by the Parliament can become an act only if it receives the assent of the President. When such a bill is presented to the President for his assent, he has three alternatives (under Article 111 of
the Constitution):
1. He may give his assent to the bill, or
2. He may withhold his assent to the bill, or
3. He may return the bill (if it is not a Money bill) for reconsideration of the Parliament. However, if the bill is passed again by the Parliament with or without amendments and again presented to
the President, the President must give his assent to the bill.

Thus, the President has the veto power over the bills passed by the Parliament , that is, he can withhold his assent to the bills. The object of conferring this power on the President is two-fold–
(a) to prevent hasty and ill-considered legislation by the Parliament; and 
(b) to prevent a legislation which may be unconstitutional.

The veto power enjoyed by the executive in modern states can be classified into the following four types:
1. Absolute veto, that is, withholding of assent to the bill passed by the legislature.
2. Qualified veto, which can be overridden by the legislature with a higher majority.
3. Suspensive veto, which can be overridden by the legislature with an ordinary majority.
4. Pocket veto, that is, taking no action on the bill passed by the legislature.
Of the above four, the President of India is vested with three– absolute veto, suspensive veto and pocket veto. There is no qualified veto in the case of Indian President; it is possessed by the American
President.

Absolute Veto:
It refers to the power of the President to withhold his assent to a bill passed by the Parliament. The bill then ends and does not become an act. Usually, this veto is exercised in the following two cases:
(a) With respect to private members’ bills (ie, bills introduced by any member of Parliament who is not a minister); and
(b) With respect to the government bills when the cabinet resigns (after the passage of the bills but before the assent by the President) and the new cabinet advises the President not to give his assent to such bills.

In 1954, President Dr. Rajendra Prasad withheld his assent to the PEPSU Appropriation Bill. The bill was passed by the Parliament when the President’s Rule was in operation in the state of PEPSU.
But, when the bill was presented to the President for his assent, the President’s Rule was revoked. 
Again in 1991, President R Venkataraman withheld his assent to the Salary, Allowances and Pension of Members of Parliament (Amendment) Bill. The bill was passed by the Parliament (on the last day before dissolution of Lok Sabha) without obtaining the previous recommendation of the President.

Suspensive Veto:
The President exercises this veto when he returns a bill for reconsideration of the Parliament. However, if the bill is passed again by the Parliament with or without amendments and again presented to
the President, it is obligatory for the President to give his assent to the bill. This means that the presidential veto is overridden by a repassage of the bill by the same ordinary majority (and not a higher majority as required in USA).
The President does not possess this veto in the case of money bills. The President can either give his assent to a money bill or withhold his assent to a money bill but cannot return it for the reconsideration of the Parliament. Normally, the President gives his assent to money bill as it is introduced in the Parliament with his previous permission.

Pocket Veto:
In this case, the President neither ratifies nor rejects nor returns the bill, but simply keeps the bill pending for an indefinite period. This power of the President not to take any action (either positive or negative) on the bill is known as the pocket veto. The President can exercise this veto power as the Constitution does not prescribe any time-limit within which he has to take the decision with respect to a bill presented to him for his assent. In USA, on the other hand, the President has to return the bill for reconsideration within 10 days. Hence, it is remarked that the pocket of the Indian President is bigger
than that of the American President.

In 1986, President Zail Singh exercised the pocket veto with respect to the Indian Post Office (Amendment) Bill. The bill, passed by the Rajiv Gandhi Government, imposed restrictions on the freedom of press and hence, was widely criticised. After three years, in 1989, the next President R Venkataraman sent the bill back for reconsideration, but the new National Front Government decided to drop the bill.

It should be noted here that the President has no veto power in respect of a constitutional amendment bill. The 24th Constitutional Amendment Act of 1971 made it obligatory for the President to give his assent to a constitutional amendment bill.

Presidential Veto over State Legislation:
The President has veto power with respect to state legislation also. A bill passed by a state legislature can become an act only if it receives the assent of the governor or the President (in case the bill is reserved for the consideration of the President). When a bill, passed by a state legislature, is presented to the governor for his assent, he has four alternatives (under Article 200 of the Constitution):
1. He may give his assent to the bill, or
2. He may withhold his assent to the bill, or
3. He may return the bill (if it is not a money bill) for reconsideration of the state legislature, or
4. He may reserve the bill for the consideration of the President.

When a bill is reserved by the governor for the consideration of the President, the President has three alternatives (Under Article 201 of the Constitution):
1. He may give his assent to the bill, or
2. He may withhold his assent to the bill, or
3. He may direct the governor to return the bill (if it is not a money bill) for the reconsideration of the state legislature. If the bill is passed again by the state legislature with or without amendments and presented again to the President for his assent, the President is not bound to give his assent to the bill.
This means that the state legislature cannot override the veto power of the President. Further, the Constitution has not prescribed any time limit within which the President has to take decision with regard to a bill reserved by the governor for his consideration. Hence, the President can exercise pocket veto in respect of state legislation also.

ORDINANCE-MAKING POWER OF THE PRESIDENT:
Article 123 of the Constitution empowers the President to promulgate ordinances during the recess of Parliament. These ordinances have the same force and effect as an act of Parliament, but are in the
nature of temporary laws. The ordinance-making power is the most important legislative power of the President. It has been vested in him to deal with unforeseen or urgent matters. But, the exercises of this power is subject to the following four limitations:
1. He can promulgate an ordinance only when both the Houses of Parliament are not in session or when either of the two Houses of Parliament is not in session. An ordinance can also be issued when
only one House is in session because a law can be passed by both the Houses and not by one House alone. An ordinance made when both the Houses are in session is void. Thus, the power of the
President to legislate by ordinance is not a parallel power of legislation.

2. He can make an ordinance only when he is satisfied that the circumstances exist that render it necessary for him to take immediate action. In Cooper case, (1970), the Supreme Court held that the
President’s satisfaction can be questioned in a court on the ground of  malafide. This means that the decision of the President to issue an ordinance can be questioned in a court on the ground that the
President has prorogued one House or both Houses of Parliament deliberately with a view to promulgate an ordinance on a controversial subject, so as to bypass the parliamentary decision and thereby
circumventing the authority of the Parliament. The 38th Constitutional Amendment Act of 1975 made the President’s satisfaction final and conclusive and beyond judicial review. But, this provision was deleted by the 44th Constitutional Amendment Act of 1978. Thus, the President’s satisfaction is justiciable on the ground of malafide.

3. His ordinance-making power is coextensive as regards all matters except duration, with the law-making powers of the Parliament. This has two implications:
(a) An ordinance can be issued only on those subjects on which the Parliament can make laws.
(b) An ordinance is subject to the same constitutional limitation as an act of Parliament. Hence, an ordinance cannot abridge or take away any of the fundamental rights.

4. Every ordinance issued by the President during the recess of Parliament must be laid before both the Houses of Parliament when it reassembles. If the ordinance is approved by both the Houses, it becomes an act. If Parliament takes no action at all, the ordinance ceases to operate on the expiry of six weeks from the reassembly of Parliament. The ordinance may also cease to operate even earlier
than the prescribed six weeks, if both the Houses of Parliament pass resolutions disapproving it. If the Houses of Parliament are summoned to reassemble on different dates, the period of six weeks is calculated from the later of those dates. This means that the maximum life of an ordinance can be six months and six weeks, in case of non-approval by the Parliament (six months being the maximum gap between the two sessions of Parliament). If an ordinance is allowed to lapse without being placed before Parliament, then the acts done and completed under it, before it ceases to operate, remain fully valid and effective.

The President can also withdraw an ordinance at any time. However, his power of ordinance-making is not a discretionary power, and he can promulgate or withdraw an ordinance only on the advice of
the council of ministers headed by the prime minister. An ordinance like any other legislation, can be retrospective, that is, it may come into force from a back date. It may modify or repeal any act of Parliament or another ordinance. It can alter or amend a tax law also. However, it cannot be issued to amend the Constitution. 

The ordinance-making power of the President in India is rather unusual and not found in most of the democratic Constitutions of the world including that of USA, and UK. In justification of the ordinancemaking power of the President, Dr. B.R. Ambedkar said in the Constituent Assembly that the mechanism of issuing an ordinance has been devised in order to enable the Executive to deal with a situation that may suddenly and immediately arise when the Parliament is not in session. It must be clarified here that the ordinance-making power of the President has no necessary connection with the national emergency envisaged in Article 352. The President can issue an ordinance even when there is no war or external aggression or armed rebellion.

The rules of Lok Sabha require that whenever a bill seeking to replace an ordinance is introduced in the House, a statement explaining the circumstances that had necessitated immediate legislation by ordinance should also be placed before the House. So far, no case has gone to the Supreme Court regarding promulgation of ordinance by the President. But, the judgement of the Supreme Court in the D.C. Wadhwa case (1987) is highly relevant here. In that case, the court pointed out that between 1967–1981 the Governor of Bihar promulgated 256 ordinances and all these were kept in force for periods ranging from one to fourteen years by promulgation from time to time. The court ruled that successive repromulgation of ordinances with the same text without any attempt to get the bills passed by the assembly would amount to violation of the Constitution and the ordinance so repromulgated is liable to be struck down. It held that the exceptional power of law-making through ordinance cannot be used as a substitute for the legislative power of the state legislature.

PARDONING POWER OF THE PRESIDENT:
Article 72 of the Constitution empowers the President to grant pardons to persons who have been tried and convicted of any offence in all cases where the:
1. Punishment or sentence is for an offence against a Union Law;
2. Punishment or sentence is by a court martial (military court); and
3. Sentence is a sentence of death.

The pardoning power of the President is independent of the Judiciary; it is an executive power. But, the President while exercising this power, does not sit as a court of appeal. The object of conferring this power on the President is two-fold: 
(a) to keep the door open for correcting any judicial errors in the operation of law; and, 
(b) to afford relief from a sentence, which the President regards as unduly harsh.

The pardoning power of the President includes the following:
1. Pardon: It removes both the sentence and the conviction and completely absolves the convict from all sentences, punishments and disqualifications.
2. Commutation: It denotes the substitution of one form of punishment for a lighter form. For example, a death sentence may be commuted to rigorous imprisonment, which in turn may be commuted to a simple imprisonment.
3. Remission: It implies reducing the period of sentence without changing its character. For example, a sentence of rigorous imprisonment for two years may be remitted to rigorous imprisonment for one year.
4. Respite: It denotes awarding a lesser sentence in place of one originally awarded due to some special fact, such as the physical disability of a convict or the pregnancy of a woman offender.
5. Reprieve: It implies a stay of the execution of a sentence (especially that of death) for a temporary period. Its purpose is to enable the convict to have time to seek pardon or commutation from the President.

Under Article 161 of the Constitution, the governor of a state also possesses the pardoning power. Hence, the governor can also grant pardons, reprieves, respites and remissions of punishment or suspend, remit and commute the sentence of any person convicted of any offence against a state law. But, the pardoning power of the governor differs from that of the President in following two respects:
1. The President can pardon sentences inflicted by court martial (military courts) while the governor cannot.
2. The President can pardon death sentence while governor cannot. Even if a state law prescribes death sentence, the power to grant pardon lies with the President and not the governor.
However, the governor can suspend, remit or commute a death sentence. In other words, both the governor and the President have concurrent power in respect of suspension, remission and commutation of death sentence.

The Supreme Court examined the pardoning power of the President under different cases and laid down the following principles: 
1. The petitioner for mercy has no right to an oral hearing by the President.
2. The President can examine the evidence afresh and take a view different from the view taken by the court.
3. The power is to be exercised by the President on the advice of the union cabinet.
4. The President is not bound to give reasons for his order.
5. The President can afford relief not only from a sentence that he regards as unduly harsh but also from an evident mistake.
6. There is no need for the Supreme Court to lay down specific guidelines for the exercise of power by the President.
7. The exercise of power by the President is not subject to judicial review except where the presidential decision is arbitrary, irrational, mala fide or discriminatory.
8. Where the earlier petition for mercy has been rejected by the President, stay cannot be obtained by filing another petition.

CONSTITUTIONAL POSITION OF THE PRESIDENT:
The Constitution of India has provided for a parliamentary form of government. Consequently, the President has been made only a nominal executive; the real executive being the council of ministers
headed by the prime minister. In other words, the President has to exercise his powers and functions with the aid and advise of the council of ministers headed by the prime minister. Dr. B.R. Ambedkar summed up the true position of the President in the following way:
“In the Indian Constitution, there is placed at the head of the Indian Union a functionary who is called the President of the Union. The title of the functionary reminds of the President of the United States. But
beyond the identity of names, there is nothing in common between the form of government prevalent in America and the form of government adopted under the Indian Constitution. The American form of government is called the presidential system of government and what the Indian Constitution adopted is the Parliamentary system. Under the presidential system of America, the President is the Chief head of the Executive and administration is vested in him. Under the Indian Constitution, the President occupies the same position as the King under the English Constitution. He is the head of the State but not of
the Executive. He represents the nation but does not rule the nation. He is the symbol of the nation. His place in administration is that of a ceremonial device or a seal by which the nation’s decisions are made known. He is generally bound by the advice of his ministers. He can do nothing contrary to their advice nor can he do anything without their advice. The President of the United States can dismiss any
secretary at any time. The President of the Indian Union has no power to do so, so long as his ministers command a majority in Parliament”. In estimating the constitutional position of the President, particular
reference has to be made to the provisions of Articles 53, 74 and 75. These are:
1. The executive power of the Union shall be vested in President and shall be exercised by him either directly or through officers subordinate to him in accordance with this Constitution (Article 53).
2. There shall be a council of ministers with the Prime Minister at the head to aid and advise the President who ‘shall’, in the exercise of his functions, act in accordance with such advice (Article 74).
3. The council of ministers shall be collectively responsible to the Lok Sabha (Article 75). This provision is the foundation of the parliamentary system of government.

The 42nd Constitutional Amendment Act of 1976 (enacted by the Indira Gandhi Government) made the President bound by the advice of the council of ministers headed by the prime minister16. The 44th
Constitutional Amendment Act of 1978 (enacted by the Janata Party Government headed by Morarji Desai) authorised the President to require the council of ministers to reconsider such advice either
generally or otherwise. However, he ‘shall’ act in accordance with the advice tendered after such reconsideration. In other words, the President may return a matter once for reconsideration of his ministers, but the reconsidered advice shall be binding.

In October 1997, the cabinet recommended President K.R. Narayanan to impose President’s Rule (under Article 356) in Uttar Pradesh. The President returned the matter for the reconsideration of the cabinet, which then decided not to move ahead in the matter. Hence, the BJP-led government under Kalyan Singh was saved. Again in September 1998, the President KR Narayanan returned a
recommendation of the cabinet that sought the imposition of the President’s Rule in Bihar. After a couple of months, the cabinet readvised the same. It was only then that the President’s Rule was imposed in Bihar, in February 1999.

Though the President has no constitutional discretion, he has some situational discretion. In other words, the President can act on his discretion (that is, without the advice of the ministers) under the following situations:
(i) Appointment of Prime Minister when no party has a clear majority in the Lok Sabha or when the Prime Minister in office dies suddenly and there is no obvious successor.
(ii) Dismissal of the council of ministers when it cannot prove the confidence of the Lok Sabha.
(iii) Dissolution of the Lok Sabha if the council of ministers has lost its majority.

Vice-President:
The Vice-President occupies the second highest office in the country. He is accorded a rank next to the President in the official warrant of precedence. This office is modelled on the lines of the American Vice-President.

ELECTION OF VICE-PRESIDENT:
The Vice-President, like the president, is elected not directly by the people but by the method of indirect election. He is elected by the members of an electoral college consisting of the members of both Houses of Parliament. Thus, this electoral college is different from the electoral college for the election of the President in the following two respects:
1. It consists of both elected and nominated members of the Parliament (in the case of president, only elected members).
2. It does not include the members of the state legislative assemblies (in the case of President, the elected members of the state legislative assemblies are included). 

Explaining the reason for this difference, Dr. B.R. Ambedkar observed: “The President is the head of the State and his power extends both to the administration by the Centre as well as to the states. Consequently, it is necessary that in his election, not only members of Parliament should play their part, but the members of the state legislatures should have a voice. But, when we come to the Vice-President, his normal functions are to preside over the council of states. It is only on a rare occasion, and that too for a temporary period, that he may be called upon to assume the duties of the president. That being so, it does not seem necessary that the members of the state legislatures should also be invited to take part in the election of the Vice-President”.
But, the manner of election is same in both the cases. Thus, the Vice-President’s election, like that of the President’s election, is held in accordance with the system of proportional representation by means of the single transferable vote and the voting is by secret ballot.

All doubts and disputes in connection with election of the VicePresident are inquired into and decided by the Supreme Court whose decision is final. The election of a person as Vice-President cannot be challenged on the ground that the electoral college was incomplete (i.e., existence of any vacancy among the members of electoral college). If the election of a person as VicePresident is declared void by the Supreme Court, acts done by him before the date of such declaration of the Supreme Court are not invalidated (i.e., they continue to remain in force).

QUALIFICATIONS, OATH AND CONDITIONS OF VICE-PRESIDENT:
Qualifications of Vice-President:
To be eligible for election as Vice-President, a person should fulfil the following qualifications:
1. He should be a citizen of India.
2. He should have completed 35 years of age.
3. He should be qualified for election as a member of the Rajya Sabha.
4. He should not hold any office of profit under the Union government or any state government or any local authority or any other public authority.

But, a sitting President or Vice-President of the Union, the governor of any state and a minister for the Union or any state is not deemed to hold any office of profit and hence qualified for being a candidate for Vice-President. Further, the nomination of a candidate for election to the office of Vice-President must be subscribed by at least 20 electors as proposers and 20 electors as seconders. Every candidate has to make a security deposit of Rs. 15,000 in the Reserve Bank of India.

Oath or Affirmation of Vice-President:
Before entering upon his office, the VicePresident has to make and subscribe to an oath or affirmation. In his oath, the VicePresident swears:
1. to bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of India; and
2. to faithfully discharge the duties of his office. 
The oath of office to the Vice-President is administered by the President or some person appointed in that behalf by him.

Conditions of Office of Vice-President:
The Constitution lays down the following two conditions of the Vice-President’s office:
1. He should not be a member of either House of Parliament or a House of the state legislature. If any such person is elected Vice-President, he is deemed to have vacated his seat in that House on the date on which he enters upon his office as Vice-President.
2. He should not hold any other office of profit.

TERM AND VACANCY OF VICE-PRESIDENT:
Term of Office of Vice-President:
The Vice-President holds office for a term of five years from the date on which he enters upon his office. However, he can resign from his office at any time by addressing the resignation letter to the President. He can also be removed from the office before completion of his term. A formal impeachment is not required for his removal. He can be removed by a resolution passed by a majority of all the then members of the Rajya Sabha and agreed to by the Lok Sabha. This means that this resolution should be passed in the Rajya Sabha by an effective majority and in the Lok Sabha by a simple majority. It must be noted here that the effective majority in India is only a type of special majority and not a separate one. Further, this resolution can be introduced only in the Rajya Sabha and not in the Lok Sabha. But, no such resolution can be moved unless at least 14 days’ advance notice has been given. Notably, no ground has been mentioned in the Constitution for his removal. The Vice-President can hold office beyond his term of five years until his successor assumes charge. He is also eligible for reelection to that office. He may be elected for any number of terms.

Vacancy in Office of Vice-President:
A vacancy in the Vice-President’s office can occur in any of the following ways:
1. On the expiry of his tenure of five years.
2. By his resignation.
3. On his removal.
4. By his death.6
5. Otherwise, for example, when he becomes disqualified to hold office or when his election is declared void.
When the vacancy is going to be caused by the expiration of the term of the sitting vicepresident, an election to fill the vacancy must be held before the expiration of the term.
If the office falls vacant by resignation, removal, death or otherwise, then election to fill the vacancy should be held as soon as possible after the occurrence of the vacancy. The newly elected vice-president remains in office for a full term of five years from the date he assumes charge of his office.

POWERS AND FUNCTIONS OF VICE-PRESIDENT:
The functions of Vice-President are two-fold:
1. He acts as the ex-officio Chairman of Rajya Sabha. In this capacity, his powers and functions are similar to those of the Speaker of Lok Sabha. In this respect, he resembles the American vicepresident who also acts as the Chairman of the Senate–the Upper House of the American legislature.

2. He acts as President when a vacancy occurs in the office of the President due to his resignation, impeachment, death or otherwise. He can act as President only for a maximum period of six months within which a new President has to be elected. Further, when the sitting President is unable to discharge his functions due to absence, illness or any other cause, the Vice-President discharges his functions until the President resumes his office.
While acting as President or discharging the functions of President, the Vice-President does not perform the duties of the office of the chairman of Rajya Sabha. During this period, those duties are performed by the Deputy Chairman of Rajya Sabha. 

The Constitution has not fixed any emoluments for the VicePresident in that capacity. He draws his regular salary in his capacity as the ex-officio Chairman of the Rajya Sabha. In 2018, the Parliament increased the salary of the Chairman of the Rajya Sabha from Rs. 1.25 lakh to Rs. 4 lakh per month9. Earlier in 2008, the pension of the retired Vice-President was increased from Rs. 20,000 per month to 50% of his salary per month. In addition, he is entitled to daily allowance, free furnished residence, medical, travel and other facilities.
During any period when the Vice-President acts as President or discharges the functions of the President, he is not entitled to the salary or allowance payable to the Chairman of Rajya Sabha, but the salary and allowance of the President.

INDIAN AND AMERICAN VICEPRESIDENTS COMPARISION:
Though the office of the Indian VicePresident is modelled on the lines of the American Vice-President, there is a difference. The American Vice-President succeeds to the presidency when it falls vacant, and remains President for the unexpired term of his predecessor. The Indian Vice-President, on the other hand, does not assume the office of the President when it falls vacant for the unexpired term. He merely serves as an acting President until the new President assumes charge. From the above it is clear that the Constitution has not assigned any significant function to the Vice-President in that capacity. Hence, some scholars call him ‘His Superfluous Highness’. This office was created with a view to maintain the political continuity of the Indian State.

Prime Minister:
In the scheme of parliamentary system of government provided by the constitution, the President is the nominal executive authority (de jure executive) and Prime Minister is the real executive authority (de facto executive). In other words, president is the head of the State while Prime Minister is the head of the government.

APPOINTMENT OF THE PRIME MINISTER:
The Constitution does not contain any specific procedure for the selection and appointment of the Prime Minister. Article 75 says only that the Prime Minister shall be appointed by the president. However, this does not imply that the president is free to appoint any one as the Prime Minister. In accordance with the conventions of the parliamentary system of government, the President has to appoint the leader of the majority party in the Lok Sabha as the Prime Minister. But, when no party has a clear majority in the Lok Sabha, then the President may exercise his personal discretion in the selection and appointment of the Prime Minister. In such a situation, the President usually appoints the leader of the largest party or coalition in the Lok Sabha as the Prime Minister and asks him to seek a vote of confidence in the House within a month. 
This discretion was exercised by the President, for the first time in 1979, when Neelam Sanjiva Reddy (the then President) appointed Charan Singh (the coalition leader) as the Prime Minister after the fall of the Janata Party government headed by Morarji Desai. 
There is also one more situation when the president may have to exercise his individual judgement in the selection and appointment of the Prime Minister, that is, when the Prime Minister in office dies suddenly and there is no obvious successor. This is what happened when Indira Gandhi was assassinated in 1984. The then President Zail Singh appointed Rajiv Gandhi as the Prime Minister by ignoring the precedent of appointing a caretaker Prime Minister. Later on, the Congress parliamentary party unanimously elected him as its leader. However, if, on the death of an incumbent Prime Minister, the ruling party elects a new leader, the President has no choice but to appoint him as Prime Minister.

In 1980, the Delhi High Court held that the Constitution does not require that a person must prove his majority in the Lok Sabha before he is appointed as the Prime Minister. The President may first appoint him the Prime Minister and then ask him to prove his majority in the Lok Sabha within a reasonable period. For example, Charan Singh (1979), V.P. Singh (1989), Chandrasekhar (1990), P.V. Narasimha Rao (1991), A.B. Vajyapee (1996), Deve Gowda (1996), I.K. Gujral (1997) and again A.B. Vajpayee (1998) were appointed as Prime Ministers in this way.

In 1997, the Supreme Court held that a person who is not a member of either House of Parliament can be appointed as Prime Minister for six months, within which, he should become a member of either House of Parliament; otherwise, he ceases to be the Prime Minister. Constitutionally, the Prime Minister may be a member of any of the two Houses of parliament. For example, three Prime Ministers, Indira Gandhi (1966), Deve Gowda (1996) and Manmohan Singh (2004), were members of the Rajya Sabha. In Britain, on the other hand, the Prime Minister should definitely be a member of the Lower House (House of Commons).

OATH, TERM AND SALARY OF THE PRIME MINISTER:
Before the Prime Minister enters upon his office, the president administers to him the oaths of office and secrecy. In his oath of office, the Prime Minister swears:
1. to bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of India,
2. to uphold the sovereignty and integrity of India,
3. to faithfully and conscientiously discharge the duties of his office, and
4. to do right to all manner of people in accordance with the Constitution and the law, without fear or favour, affection or ill will.

In his oath of secrecy, the Prime Minister swears that he will not directly or indirectly communicate or reveal to any person(s) any matter that is brought under his consideration or becomes known to him as a Union Minister except as may be required for the due discharge of his duties as such minister. The term of the Prime Minister is not fixed and he holds office during the pleasure of the president. However, this does not mean that the president can dismiss the Prime Minister at any time. So long as the Prime Minister enjoys the majority support in the Lok Sabha, he cannot be dismissed by the President. However, if he loses the confidence of the Lok Sabha, he must resign or the President can dismiss him.

The salary and allowances of the Prime Minister are determined by the Parliament from time to time. He gets the salary and allowances that are payable to a member of Parliament. Additionally, he gets a sumptuary allowance, free accommodation, travelling allowance, medical facilities, etc. 

POWERS AND FUNCTIONS OF THE PRIME MINISTER:
The powers and functions of Prime Minister can be stated under the following heads:
In Relation to Council of Ministers:
The Prime Minister enjoys the following powers as head of the Union council of ministers:
1. He recommends persons who can be appointed as ministers by the president. The President can appoint only those persons as ministers who are recommended by the Prime Minister.
2. He allocates and reshuffles various portfolios among the ministers.
3. He can ask a minister to resign or advise the President to dismiss him in case of difference of opinion.
4. He presides over the meeting of council of ministers and influences its decisions.
5. He guides, directs, controls, and coordinates the activities of all the ministers.
6. He can bring about the collapse of the council of ministers by resigning from office.

Since the Prime Minister stands at the head of the council of ministers, the other ministers cannot function when the Prime Minister resigns or dies. In other words, the resignation or death of an incumbent Prime Minister automatically dissolves the council of ministers and thereby generates a vacuum. The resignation or death of any other minister, on the other hand, merely creates a vacancy which the Prime Minister may or may not like to fill.

The Prime Minister enjoys the following powers in relation to the President:
1. He is the principal channel of communication between the President and the council of ministers. It is the duty of the prime minister:
(a) to communicate to the President all decisions of the council of ministers relating to the administration of the affairs of the Union and proposals for legislation;
(b) to furnish such information relating to the administration of the affairs of the Union and proposals for legislation as the President may call for; and
(c) if the President so requires, to submit for the consideration of the council of ministers any matter on which a decision has been taken by a minister but which has not been considered by the council.
2. He advises the president with regard to the appointment of important officials like attorney general of India, Comptroller and Auditor General of India, chairman and members of the UPSC, election commissioners, chairman and members of the finance commission and so on.

In Relation to Parliament the Prime Minister is the leader of the Lower House. In this capacity, he enjoys the following powers:
1. He advises the President with regard to summoning and proroguing of the sessions of the Parliament.
2. He can recommend dissolution of the Lok Sabha to President at any time.
3. He announces government policies on the floor of the House.

Other Powers & Functions of the Prime Minister:
In addition to the above-mentioned three major roles, the Prime Minister has various other roles. These are:
1. He is the chairman of the NITI Ayog (which succeded the planning commission), National Integration Council, InterState Council, National Water Resources Council and some other bodies.
2. He plays a significant role in shaping the foreign policy of the country.
3. He is the chief spokesman of the Union government.
4. He is the crisis manager-in-chief at the political level during emergencies.
5. As a leader of the nation, he meets various sections of people in different states and receives memoranda from them regarding their problems, and so on.
6. He is leader of the party in power.
7. He is political head of the services.

Thus, the Prime Minister plays a very significant and highly crucial role in the politico-administrative system of the country. Dr. B.R. Ambedkar stated, ‘If any functionary under our constitution is to be compared with the US president, he is the Prime Minister and not the president of the Union’.

ROLE DESCRIPTIONS
The various comments made by the eminent political scientists and constitutional experts on the role of Prime Minister in Britain holds good in the Indian context also. These are mentioned below:

Lord Morely: He described Prime Minister as ‘primus inter pares’ (first among equals) and ‘key stone of the cabinet arch’. He said, “The head of the cabinet is ‘primus inter pares’, and occupied a position which so long as it lasts, is one of exceptional and peculiar authority”. 

Herbert Marrison: “As the head of the Government, he (prime minister) is ‘primus inter pares’. But, it is today for too modest an appreciation of the Prime Minister’s position”.

Sir William Vernor Harcourt: He described Prime Minister as ‘inter stellas luna minores’ (a moon among lesser stars).

Jennings: “He is, rather, a sun around which planets revolve. He is the keystone of the constitution. All roads in the constitution lead to the Prime Minister.”

H.J. Laski: On the relationship between the Prime Minister and the cabinet, he said that the Prime Minister “is central to its formation, central to its life, and central to its death”. He described him as “the pivot
around which the entire governmental machinery revolves.” 

H.R.G. Greaves: “The Government is the master of the country and he (Prime Minister) is the master of the Government.”

Munro: He called Prime Minister as “the captain of the ship of the state”. 

Ramsay Muir: He described Prime Minister as “the steersman of steering wheel of the ship of the state.”

The role of the Prime Minister in the British parliamentary government is so significant and crucial that observers like to call it a ‘Prime Ministerial government.’ Thus, R.H. Crossman says, ‘The post-war epoch has been the final transformation of cabinet overnment into Prime Ministerial government.’ 
Similarly, Humphrey Berkely points out, ‘Parliament is not, in practice, sovereign. The parliamentary democracy has now collapsed at Westminster. The basic defect in the British system of governing is the super-ministerial powers of the Prime Minister.’ The same description holds good to the Indian context too.

RELATIONSHIP OF PRIME MINISTER WITH THE PRESIDENT:
The following provisions of the Constitution deal with the relationship between the President and the Prime Minister:
1. Article 74: There shall be a council of ministers with the Prime Minister at the head to aid and advise the President who shall, in the exercise of his functions, act in accordance with such advice. However, the President may require the council of ministers to reconsider such advice and the President shall act in accordance with the advice tendered after such reconsideration.

2. Article 75: (a) The Prime Minister shall be appointed by the President and the other ministers shall be appointed by the president on the advice of the Prime Minister; 
(b) The ministers shall hold office during the pleasure of the president; and 
(c) The council of ministers shall be collectively responsible to the House of the People.

3. Article 78: It shall be the duty of the Prime Minister:
(a) to communicate to the President all decisions of the council of ministers relating to the administration of the affairs of the Union and proposals for legislation;
(b) to furnish such information relating to the administration of the affairs of the Union and proposals for legislation as the President may call for; and
(c) if the President so requires, to submit for the consideration of the council of ministers any matter on which a decision has been taken by a minister but which has not been considered by the council.

CHIEF MINISTERS WHO BECAME PRIME MINISTERS:
Six people–Morarji Desai, Charan Singh, V.P. Singh, P.V. Narasimha Rao, H.D. Deve Gowda and Narendra Modi–became Prime Ministers after being Chief Ministers of their respective States. 
Morarji Desai, Chief Minister of the erstwhile Bombay State during 1952–56, became the first non-Congress Prime Minister in March 1977. 
Charan Singh, who succeeded him, was the Chief Minister of the undivided Uttar Pradesh in 1967–1968 and again in 1970. 
V.P. Singh, also from U.P., became Prime Minister in the short lived National Front government (December 1989-November 1990). 
P.V. Narasimha Rao, the first Prime Minister from South India, who held the post from 1991–1996, was Chief Minister of Andhra Pradesh between 1971–1973. 
H.D. Deve Gowda was Chief Minister of Karnataka when he was chosen to lead the United Front government in June 1996.
Narendra Modi (BJP) was the Chief Minister of Gujarat when he became the Prime Minister in May 2014. He served as the Chief Minister of Gujarat for four times during 2001 to 2014.

Central Council of Ministers:
As the Constitution of India provides for a parliamentary system of government modelled on the British pattern, the council of ministers headed by the prime minister is the real executive authority is our politico-administrative system. The principles of parliamentary system of government are not detailed in the Constitution, but two Articles (74 and 75) deal with them in a broad, sketchy and general manner. Article 74 deals with the status of the council of ministers while Article 75 deals with the appointment, tenure, responsibility, qualification, oath and salaries and allowances of the ministers.

CONSTITUTIONAL PROVISIONS:
Article 74—Council of Ministers to aid and advise President
1. There shall be a Council of Ministers with the Prime Minister at the head to aid and advise the President who shall, in the exercise of his functions, act in accordance with such advice. However, the President may require the Council of Ministers to reconsider such advice and the President shall act in accordance with the advice tendered after such reconsideration.
2. The advice tendered by Ministers to the President shall not be inquired into in any court.

Article 75–Other Provisions as to Ministers
1. The Prime Minister shall be appointed by the President and the other Ministers shall be appointed by the President on the advice of the Prime Minister.
2. The total number of ministers, including the Prime Minister, in the Council of Ministers shall not exceed 15% of the total strength of the Lok Sabha. This provision was added by the 91st Amendment Act of 2003. 
3. A member of either house of Parliament belonging to any political party who is disqualified on the ground of defection shall also be disqualified to be appointed as a minister. This provision was also added by the 91st Amendment Act of 2003.
4. The ministers shall hold office during the pleasure of the President.
5. The council of ministers shall be collectively responsible to the Lok Sabha.
6. The President shall administer the oaths of office and secrecy to a minister. 
7. A minister who is not a member of the Parliament (either house) for any period of six consecutive months shall cease to be a minister.
8. The salaries and allowances of ministers shall be determined by the Parliament. 

Article 77–Conduct of Business of the Government of India
1. All executive action of the Government of India shall be expressed to be taken in the name of the President.
2. Orders and other instruments made and executed in the name of the President shall be authenticated in such manner as may be specified in rules to be made by the President.
Further, the validity of an order or instrument which is so authenticated shall not be called in question on the ground that it is not an order or instrument made or executed by the President.
3. The President shall make rules for the more convenient transaction of the business of the Government of India, and for the allocation among Ministers of the said business.

Article 78–Duties of Prime Minister
It shall be the duty of the Prime Minister to:
1. To communicate to the President all decisions of the Council of Ministers relating to the administration of the affairs of the Union and proposals for legislation
2. To furnish such information relating to the administration of the affairs of the Union and proposals for legislation as the President may call for
3. If the President so requires, to submit for the consideration of the Council of Ministers any matter on which a decision has been taken by a Minister but which has not been considered by the Council

Article 88–Rights of Ministers as Respects the Houses 
Every minister shall have the right to speak and take part in the proceedings of either House, any joint sitting of the Houses and any Committee of Parliament of which he may be named a
member. But he shall not be entitled to vote.

NATURE OF ADVICE BY MINISTERS
Article 74 provides for a council of ministers with the Prime Minister at the head to aid and advise the President in the exercise of his functions. The 42nd and 44th Constitutional Amendment Acts have made the advice binding on the President. Further, the nature of advice tendered by ministers to the President cannot be enquired by any court. This provision emphasises the intimate and the confidential relationship between the President and the ministers.

In 1971, the Supreme Court held that ‘even after the dissolution of the Lok Sabha, the council of ministers does not cease to hold office. Article 74 is mandatory and, therefore, the president cannot exercise the executive power without the aid and advise of the council of ministers. Any exercise of executive power without the aid and advice will be unconstitutional as being violative of Article 74’. 
Again in 1974, the court held that ‘wherever the Constitution requires the satisfaction of the President, the satisfaction is not the personal satisfaction of the President but it is the satisfaction of the council of ministers with whose aid and on whose advice the President exercises his powers and functions’.

APPOINTMENT OF MINISTERS:
The Prime Minister is appointed by the President, while the other ministers are appointed by the President on the advice of the Prime Minister. This means that the President can appoint only those persons as ministers who are recommended by the Prime minister.
Usually, the members of Parliament, either Lok Sabha or Rajya Sabha, are appointed as ministers. A person who is not a member of either House of Parliament can also be appointed as a minister. But, within six months, he must become a member (either by election or by nomination) of either House of Parliament, otherwise, he ceases to be a minister. A minister who is a member of one House of Parliament has the right to speak and to take part in the proceedings of the other House also, but he can vote only in the House of which he is a member.

OATH AND SALARY OF MINISTERS:
Before a minister enters upon his office, the president administers to him the oaths of office and secrecy. In his oath of office, the minister swears:
1. to bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of India,
2. to uphold the sovereignty and integrity of India,
3. to faithfully and conscientiously discharge the duties of his office, and
4. to do right to all manner of people in accordance with the Constitution and the law, without fear or favour, affection or ill will.

In his oath of secrecy, the minister swears that he will not directly or indirectly communicate or reveal to any person(s) any matter that is brought under his consideration or becomes known to him as a Union minister except as may be required for the due discharge of his duties as such minister. 

In 1990, the oath by Devi Lal as deputy prime minister was challenged as being unconstitutional as the Constitution provides only for the Prime Minister and ministers. The Supreme Court upheld the oath as valid and stated that describing a person as Deputy Prime Minister is descriptive only and such description does not confer on him any powers of Prime Minister. It ruled that the description of a minister as Deputy Prime Minister or any other type of minister such as minister of state or deputy minister of which there is no mention in the Constitution does not vitiate the oath taken by him so long as the  substantive part of the oath is correct.

The salaries and allowances of ministers are determined by Parliament from time to time. A minister gets the salary and allowances that are payable to a member of Parliament. Additionally, he gets a sumptuary allowance (according to his rank), free accommodation, travelling allowance, medical facilities, etc. 

RESPONSIBILITY OF MINISTERS:
Collective Responsibility:
The fundamental principle underlying the working of parliamentary system of government is the principle of collective responsibility. Article 75 clearly states that the council of ministers is collectively responsible to the Lok Sabha. This means that all the ministers own joint responsibility to the Lok Sabha for all their acts of ommission and commission. They work as a team and swim or sink together. When the Lok Sabha passes a no-confidence motion against the council of ministers, all the ministers have to resign including those ministers who are from the Rajya Sabha.
Alternatively, the council of ministers can advise the president to dissolve the Lok Sabha on the ground that the House does not represent the views of the electorate faithfully and call for fresh elections. The President may not oblige the council of ministers that has lost the confidence of the Lok Sabha.

The principle of collective responsibility also means that the Cabinet decisions bind all cabinet ministers (and other ministers) even if they differed in the cabinet meeting. It is the duty of every minister to stand by cabinet decisions and support them both within and outside the Parliament. If any minister disagrees with a cabinet decision and is not prepared to defend it, he must resign. Several ministers have resigned in the past owing to their differences with the cabinet. 
For example, Dr. B.R. Ambedkar resigned because of his differences with his colleagues on the Hindu Code Bill in 1953. C.D. Deshmukh resigned due to his differences on the policy of reorganisation of states. Arif Mohammed resigned due to his opposition to the Muslim Women (Protection of Rights on Divorce) Act, 1986.

Individual Responsibility:
Article 75 also contains the principle of individual responsibility. It states that the ministers hold office during the pleasure of the president, which means that the President can remove a minister even at a time when the council of ministers enjoys the confidence of the Lok Sabha. However, the President removes a minister only on the advice of the Prime Minister. In case of a difference of opinion or dissatisfaction with the performance of a minister, the Prime Minister can ask him to resign or advice the President to dismiss him. By exercising this power, the Prime Minister can ensure the realisation of the rule of collective responsibility. 
In this context, Dr. B.R. Ambedkar observed: “Collective responsibility can be achieved only through the instrumentality of the Prime Minister. Therefore, unless and until we create that office and endow that office with statutory authority to nominate and dismiss ministers, there can be no collective responsibility.”

No Legal Responsibility:
In Britain, every order of the King for any public act is countersigned by a minister. If the order is in violation of any law, the minister would be held responsible and would be liable in the court. The legally accepted phrase in Britain is, “The king can do no wrong.” Hence, he cannot be sued in any court. In India, on the other hand, there is no provision in the Constitution for the system of legal responsibility of a minister. It is not required that an order of the President for a public act should be countersigned by a minister. Moreover, the courts are barred from enquiring into the nature of advice rendered by the ministers to the president.

COMPOSITION OF THE COUNCIL OF MINISTERS:
The council of ministers consists of three categories of ministers, namely, cabinet ministers, ministers of state, and deputy ministers. The difference between them lies in their respective ranks, emoluments, and political importance. At the top of all these ministers stands the Prime Minister–the supreme governing authority of the country. The cabinet ministers head the important ministries of the Central government like home, defence, finance, external affairs and so forth. They are members of the cabinet, attend its meetings and play an important role in deciding policies. Thus, their responsibilities extend over the entire gamut of Central government.

The ministers of state can either be given independent charge of ministries/ departments or can be attached to cabinet ministers. In case of attachment, they may either be given the charge of departments of the ministries headed by the cabinet ministers or allotted specific items of work related to the ministries headed by cabinet ministers. In both the cases, they work under the supervision and guidance as well as under the overall charge and responsibility of the cabinet ministers. In case of independent charge, they perform the same functions and exercise the same powers in relation to their ministries/departments as cabinet ministers do. However, they are not members of the cabinet and do not attend the cabinet meetings unless specially invited when something related to their ministries/ departments are considered by the cabinet.

Next in rank are the deputy ministers. They are not given independent charge of ministries/departments. They are attached to the cabinet ministers or ministers of state and assist them in their administrative, political, and parliamentary duties. They are not members of the cabinet and do not attend cabinet meetings. It must also be mentioned here that there is one more category of ministers, called parliamentary secretaries. They are the members of the last category of the council of ministers (which is also known as the ‘ministry’). They have no department under their control. They are attached to the senior ministers and assist them in the discharge of their parliamentary duties. However, since 1967, no parliamentary secretaries have been appointed except during the first phase of Rajiv Gandhi Government.
At times, the council of ministers may also include a deputy prime minister. The deputy prime ministers are appointed mostly for political reasons.

COUNCIL OF MINISTERS VS CABINET:
The words ‘council of ministers’ and ‘cabinet’ are often used interchangeably though there is a definite distinction between them. They differ from each other in respects of composition, functions, and role. 

ROLE OF CABINET:
1. It is the highest decision-making authority in our politicoadministrative system.
2. It is the chief policy formulating body of the Central government.
3. It is the supreme executive authority of the Central government.
4. It is chief coordinator of Central administration.
5. It is an advisory body to the president and its advice is binding on him.
6. It is the chief crisis manager and thus deals with all emergency situations.
7. It deals with all major legislative and financial matters.
8. It exercises control over higher appointments like constitutional authorities and senior secretariat administrators.
9. It deals with all foreign policies and foreign affairs.

ROLE DESCRIPTIONS:
The various comments made by the eminent political scientists and constitutional experts on the role of cabinet in Britain holds good in the Indian context also. These are mentioned below. 
Ramsay Muir: “The Cabinet is the steering wheel of the ship of the state.” 

Lowell: “The Cabinet is the keystone of the political arch”.

Sir John Marriott: “The Cabinet is the pivot around which the whole political machinery revolves”.

Gladstone: “The Cabinet is the solar orb around which the other bodies revolve”.

Barker: “The Cabinet is the magnet of policy”.

Bagehot: “The Cabinet is a hyphen that joins, the buckle that binds the executive and legislative departments together”.

Sir Ivor Jennings: “The Cabinet is the core of the British Constitutional System. It provides unity to the British system of Government”.

L.S. Amery: “The Cabinet is the central directing instrument of Government”.

The position of the Cabinet in the British Government has become so strong that Ramsay Muir referred to it as the ‘Dictatorship of the Cabinet’. In his book ‘How Britain is Governed’, he writes “A body which wields such powers as these may fairly be described as ‘omnipotent’ in theory, however, incapable it may be of using its omnipotence. Its position, whenever it commands a majority, is a dictatorship only qualified by publicity. This dictatorship is far more absolute that it was two generations ago”. The same description holds good in the Indian context too.

KITCHEN CABINET:
The cabinet, a small body consisting of the prime minister as its head and some 15 to 20 most important ministers, is the highest decision-making body in the formal sense. However, a still smaller body called the ‘Inner Cabinet’ or ‘Kitchen Cabinet’ has become the real centre of power. This informal body consists of the Prime Minister and two to four influential colleagues in whom he has faith and with whom he can discuss every problem. It advises the prime minister on important political and administrative issues and assists him in making crucial decisions. It is composed of not only cabinet ministers but also outsiders like friends and family members of the prime minister.
Every prime minister in India has had his ‘Inner Cabinet’–a circle within a circle. During the era of Indira Gandhi, the ‘Inner Cabinet’ which came to be called the ‘Kitchen Cabinet’ was particularly powerful.
The prime ministers have resorted to the device of ‘inner cabinet’ (extra-constitutional body) due to its merits, namely:
1. It being a small unit, is much more efficient decision-making body than a large cabinet.
2. It can meet more often and deal with business much more expeditiously than the large cabinet.
3. It helps the Prime Minister in maintaining secrecy in making decisions on important political issues.
However, it has many demerits also.
1. It reduces the authority and status of the cabinet as the highest decision-making body.
2. It circumvents the legal process by allowing outside persons to play an influential role in the government functioning.

The phenomenon of ‘kitchen cabinet’ (where decisions are cooked and placed before the cabinet for formal approval) is not unique to India. It also exists in USA and Britain and is quite powerful in influencing government decisions there. 

Cabinet Committees:
FEATURES OF CABINET COMMITTEES:
The following are the features of Cabinet Committees:
1. They are extra-constitutional in emergence. In other words, they are not mentioned in the Constitution. However, the Rules of Business provide for their establishment. 
2. They are of two types–standing and ad hoc. The former are of a permanent nature while the latter are of a temporary nature. The ad hoc committees are constituted from time to time to deal with special problems. They are disbanded after their task is completed. 
3. They are set up by the Prime Minister according to the exigencies of the time and requirements of the situation. Hence, their number, nomenclature, and composition varies from time to time. 
4. Their membership varies from three to eight. They usually include only Cabinet Ministers. However, the non-cabinet Ministers are not debarred from their membership. 
5. They not only include the Ministers in charge of subjects covered by them but also include other senior Ministers. 
6. They are mostly headed by the Prime Minister. Some times other Cabinet Ministers, particularly the Home Minister or the Finance Minister, also acts as their Chairman. But, in case the Prime Minister is a member of a committee, he invariably presides over it. 
7. They not only sort out issues and formulate proposals for the consideration of the Cabinet, but also take decisions. However, the Cabinet can review their decisions. 
8. They are an organisational device to reduce the enormous workload of the Cabinet. They also facilitate in-depth examination of policy issues and effective coordination. They are based on the principles of division of labour and effective delegation.

LIST OF CABINET COMMITTEES:
In 1994, there were the following 13 Cabinet Committees:
1. Cabinet Committee on Political Affairs
2. Cabinet Committee on Natural Calamities
3. Cabinet Committee on Parliamentary Affairs
4. Appointments Committee of the Cabinet
5. Cabinet Committee on Accommodation
6. Cabinet Committee on Foreign Investment
7. Cabinet Committee on Drug Abuse Control
8. Cabinet Committee on Prices
9. Cabinet Committee on Minority Welfare
10. Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs
11. Cabinet Committee on Trade and Investment
12. Cabinet Committee on Expenditure
13. Cabinet Committee on Infrastructure

In 2013, the following 10 Cabinet Committees were in existence:
1. Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs
2. Cabinet Committee on Prices
3. Cabinet Committee on Political Affairs
4. Appointments Committee of the Cabinet
5. Cabinet Committee on Security
6. Cabinet Committee on World Trade Organisation (WTO) Matters
7. Cabinet Committee on Investment
8. Cabinet Committee on Unique Identification Authority of India (UIDAI) related issues
9. Cabinet Committee on Parliamentary Affairs
10. Cabinet Committee on Accommodation
At present (2019), the following 8 Cabinet Committees are functional:
1. Cabinet Committee on Political Affairs
2. Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs
3. Appointments Committee of the Cabinet
4. Cabinet Committee on Security
5. Cabinet Committee on Parliamentary Affairs
6. Cabinet Committee on Accommodation
7. Cabinet Committee on Investment and Growth
8. Cabinet Committee on Employment and Skill Development

FUNCTIONS OF CABINET COMMITTEES:
The following four are the more important cabinet committees:
1. The Political Affairs Committee deals with all policy matters pertaining to domestic and foreign affairs. 
2. The Economic Affairs Committee directs and coordinates the governmental activities in the economic sphere. 
3. Appointments Committee decides all higher level appointments in the Central Secretariat, Public Enterprises, Banks and Financial Institutions. 
4. Parliamentary Affairs Committee looks after the progress of government business in the Parliament. The first three committees are chaired by the Prime Minister and the last one by the Home Minister. Of all the Cabinet Committees, the most powerful is the Political Affairs Committee, often described as a “Super-Cabinet”.

GROUPS OF MINISTERS:
In addition to cabinet committees, several Groups of Ministers (GoMs) are constituted to look into different issues / subjects. Some of these GoMs are empowered to take decisions on behalf of the Cabinet whereas the others make recommendations to the Cabinet.
The institution of GoMs has become a viable and effective instrument of coordination among the ministries. These are ad hoc bodies formed to give recommendations to the cabinet on certain emergent issues and critical problem areas. Ministers heading the concerned ministries are inducted into the relevant GoMs and when the advice is crystallised they are disbanded.

The Second Administrative Reforms Commission (2005–2009) made the following observations and recommendations with respect to the working of the GoMs:
1. The Commission observed that the constitution of a large number of GoMs has resulted in many GoMs not being able to meet regularly to complete their work thus leading to significant delays on many major issues.  
2. The Commission felt that more selective use of the institution of GoMs would perhaps lead to more effective coordination particularly if they are empowered to arrive at a decision on behalf of the Cabinet with time limits that are prescribed for completing the work entrusted to them.  
3. The Commission recommended that there is need to ensure that the existing coordination mechanism of GoMs function effectively and helps in early resolution of issues. Selective, but effective use of GoMs with clear mandate and prescribed time limits would be helpful.

Parliament:
The Parliament is the legislative organ of the Union government. It occupies a pre-eminent and central position in the Indian democratic political system due to adoption of the parliamentary form of government, also known as ‘Westminster’ model of government. Articles 79 to 122 in Part V of the Constitution deal with the organisation, composition, duration, officers, procedures, privileges, powers and so on of the Parliament.

ORGANISATION OF PARLIAMENT:
Under the Constitution, the Parliament of India consists of three parts viz, the President, the Council of States and the House of the People. In 1954, the Hindi names ‘Rajya Sabha’ and ‘Lok Sabha’ were adopted by the Council of States and the House of People respectively. The Rajya Sabha is the Upper House (Second Chamber or House of Elders) and the Lok Sabha is the Lower House (First Chamber or Popular House). The former represents the states and union territories of the Indian Union, while the latter represents the people of India as a whole. Though the President of India is not a member of either House of Parliament and does not sit in the Parliament to attend its meetings, he is an integral part of the Parliament. This is because a bill passed by both the Houses of Parliament cannot become law without the President’s assent. He also performs certain functions relating to the proceedings of the Parliament, for example, he summons and pro-rogues both the Houses, dissolves the Lok Sabha, addresses both the Houses, issues ordinances when they are not in session, and so on.
In this respect, the framers of the Indian Constitution relied on the British pattern rather than the American pattern. In Britain, the Parliament consists of the Crown (King or Queen), the House of Lords (Upper House) and the House of Commons (Lower House). By contrast, the American president is not an integral part of the legislature. In USA, the legislature, which is known as Congress, consists of the Senate (Upper House) and the House of Representatives (Lower House).
The parliamentary form of government emphasises on the interdependence between the legislative and executive organs. Hence, we have the ‘President-in-Parliament’ like the ‘Crown-inParliament’ in Britain. The presidential form of government, on the other hand, lays stress on the separation of legislative and executive organs. Hence, the American president is not regarded as a constituent part of the Congress.

COMPOSITION OF THE TWO HOUSES:
Composition of Rajya Sabha:
The maximum strength of the Rajya Sabha is fixed at 250, out of which, 238 are to be the representatives of the states and union territories (elected indirectly) and 12 are nominated by the president.
At present, the Rajya Sabha has 245 members. Of these, 229 members represent the states, 4 members represent the union territories and 12 members are nominated by the president. The Fourth Schedule of the Constitution deals with the allocation of seats in the Rajya Sabha to the states and union territories.
1. Representation of States:
The representatives of states in the Rajya Sabha are elected by the elected members of state legislative assemblies. The election is held in accordance with the system of proportional representation by means of the single transferable vote. The seats are allotted to the states in the Rajya Sabha on the basis of population. Hence, the number of representatives varies from state to state. For example, Uttar Pradesh has 31 members while Tripura has 1 member only. However, in USA, all states are given equal representation in the Senate irrespective of their population. USA has 50 states and the Senate has 100 members–2 from each state.
2. Representation of Union Territories:
The representatives of each union territory in the Rajya Sabha are indirectly elected by members of an electoral college specially constituted for the purpose. This election is also held in accordance with the system of proportional representation by means of the single transferable vote. Out of the nine union territories, only three (Delhi, Puducherry and Jammu & Kashmir) have representation in Rajya Sabha. The populations of other six union territories are too small to have any representative in the Rajya Sabha.
3. Nominated Members:
The president nominates 12 members to the Rajya Sabha from people who have special knowledge or practical experience in art, literature, science and social service. The rationale behind this principle of nomination is to provide eminent persons a place in the Rajya Sabha without going through the process of election. It should be noted here that the American Senate has no nominated members.

Composition of Lok Sabha:
The maximum strength of the Lok Sabha is fixed at 552. Out of this, 530 members are to be the representatives of the states, 20 members are to be the representatives of the union territories and 2 members are to be nominated by the president from the AngloIndian community. At present, the Lok Sabha has 545 members. Of these, 530 members represent the states, 13 members represent the union territories and 2 Anglo-Indian members are nominated by the President.

1. Representation of States:
The representatives of states in the Lok Sabha are directly elected
by the people from the territorial constituencies in the states. The
election is based on the principle of universal adult franchise.
Every Indian citizen who is above 18 years of age and who is not
disqualified under the provisions of the Constitution or any law is
eligible to vote at such election. The voting age was reduced from
21 to 18 years by the 61st Constitutional Amendment Act, 1988.

2. Representation of Union Territories:
The Constitution has empowered the Parliament to prescribe the manner of choosing the representatives of the union territories in the Lok Sabha. Accordingly, the Parliament has enacted the Union Territories (Direct Election to the House of the People) Act, 1965, by which the members of Lok Sabha from the union territories are also chosen by direct election.

3. Nominated Members:
The president can nominate two members from the Anglo-Indian community if the community is not adequately represented in the Lok Sabha. Originally, this provision was to operate till 1960 but has been extended till 2020 by the 95th Amendment Act, 2009.

SYSTEM OF ELECTIONS TO LOK SABHA:
The various aspects related to the system of elections to the Lok Sabha are as follows:

Territorial Constituencies:
For the purpose of holding direct elections to the Lok Sabha, each state is divided into territorial constituencies. In this respect, the Constitution makes the following two provisions:
1. Each state is allotted a number of seats in the Lok Sabha in such a manner that the ratio between that number and its population is the same for all states. This provision does not apply to a state having a population of less than six millions. 
2. Each state is divided into territorial constituencies in such a manner that the ratio between the population of each constituency and the number of seats allotted to it is the same throughout the state.
In brief, the Constitution ensures that there is uniformity of representation in two respects: 
(a) between the different states, and 
b) between the different constituencies in the same state. The expression ‘population’ means the population as ascertained at the preceding census of which the relevant figures have been published.

Readjustment after each Census:
After every census, a readjustment is to be made in 
(a) allocation of seats in the Lok Sabha to the states, and 
(b) division of each state into territorial constituencies. 
Parliament is empowered to determine the authority and the manner in which it is to be made. Accordingly, the Parliament has enacted the Delimitation Commission Acts in 1952, 1962, 1972 and 2002 for this purpose. The 42nd Amendment Act of 1976 froze the allocation of seats in the Lok Sabha to the states and the division of each state into territorial constituencies till the year 2000 at the 1971 level. This ban on readjustment was extended for another 25 years (ie, upto year 2026) by the 84th Amendment Act of 2001, with the same objective of encouraging population limiting measures.
The 84th Amendment Act of 2001 also empowered the government to undertake readjustment and rationalisation of territorial constituencies in the states on the basis of the population figures of 1991 census. Later, the 87th Amendment Act of 2003 provided for the delimitation of constituencies on the basis of 2001 census and not 1991 census. However, this can be done without altering the number of seats allotted to each state in the Lok Sabha.

Reservation of Seats for SCs and STs:
Though the Constitution has abandoned the system of communal representation, it provides for the reservation of seats for scheduled castes and scheduled tribes in the Lok Sabha on the basis of population ratios.
Originally, this reservation was to operate for ten years (ie, up to 1960), but it has been extended continuously since then by 10 years each time. Now, under the 95th Amendment Act of 2009, this reservation is to last until 2020.
Though seats are reserved for scheduled castes and scheduled tribes, they are elected by all the voters in a constituency, without any separate electorate. A member of scheduled castes and scheduled tribes is also not debarred from contesting a general (non-reserved) seat.
The 84th Amendment Act of 2001 provided for refixing of the reserved seats on the basis of the population figures of 1991 census as applied to rationalisation of the general seats. Later, the 87th Amendment Act of 2003 provided for the refixing of the reserved seats on the basis of 2001 census and not 1991 census.

First-Past-The-Post System:
Though the Constitution has adopted the system of proportional representation in the case of Rajya Sabha, it has not preferred the same system in the case of Lok Sabha. Instead, it has adopted the system of territorial representation (First-past-the-post system) for the election of members to the Lok Sabha.
Under territorial representation, every member of the legislature represents a geographical area known as a constituency. From each constituency, only one representative is elected. Hence such a constituency is known as single-member constituency. In this system, a candidate who secures majority of votes is declared elected. This simple majority system of representation does not represent the whole electorate. In other words, it does not secure due representation to minorities (small groups).
The system of proportional representation aims at removing the defects of territorial representation. Under this system, all sections of the people get representation in proportion to their number. Even the smallest section of the population gets its due share of representation in the legislature.
There are two kinds of proportional representation, namely, single transferable vote system and list system. In India, the first kind is adopted for the election of members to the Rajya Sabha and state legislative council and for electing the President and the Vice-President.
Though some members of the Constituent Assembly had advocated the system of proportional representation for the election of members to the Lok Sabha, the Constitution has not adopted the system due to two reasons.
1. Difficulty for the voters to understand the system (which is complicated) due to low literacy scale in the country.
2. Unsuitability to the parliamentary government due to the tendency of the system to multiply political parties leading to instability in government.
Additionally, the system of proportional representation has the following demerits:
1. It is highly expensive.
2. It does not give any scope for organising by-elections.
3. It eliminates intimate contacts between voters and representatives.
4. It promotes minority thinking and group interests.
5. It increases the significance of party system and decreases that of voter.

DURATION OF TWO HOUSES:
Duration of Rajya Sabha:
The Rajya Sabha (first constituted in 1952) is a continuing chamber, that is, it is a permanent body and not subject to dissolution. However, one-third of its members retire every second year. Their seats are filled up by fresh elections and presidential nominations at the beginning of every third year. The retiring members are eligible for re-election and renomination any number of times.
The Constitution has not fixed the term of office of members of the Rajya Sabha and left it to the Parliament. Accordingly, the Parliament in the Representation of the People Act (1951) provided that the term of office of a member of the Rajya Sabha shall be six years. The act also empowered the president of India to curtail the term of members chosen in the first Rajya Sabha. In the first batch, it was decided by lottery as to who should retire. Further, the act also authorised the President to make provisions to govern the order of retirement of the members of the Rajya Sabha.

Duration of Lok Sabha:
Unlike the Rajya Sabha, the Lok Sabha is not a continuing chamber. Its normal term is five years from the date of its first meeting after the general elections, after which it automatically dissolves. However, the President is authorised to dissolve the Lok Sabha at any time even before the completion of five years and this cannot be challenged in a court of law.
Further, the term of the Lok Sabha can be extended during the period of national emergency be a law of Parliament for one year at a time for any length of time. However, this extension cannot continue beyond a period of six months after the emergency has ceased to operate.

MEMBERSHIP OF PARLIAMENT:
Qualifications for membership of parliament:
The Constitution lays down the following qualifications for a person to be chosen a member of the Parliament:
1. He must be a citizen of India.
2. He must make and subscribe to an oath or affirmation before the person authorised by the election commission for this purpose. In his oath or affirmation, he swears
(a) To bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of India
(b) To uphold the sovereignty and integrity of India
3. He must be not less than 30 years of age in the case of the Rajya Sabha and not less than 25 years of age in the case of the Lok Sabha.
4. He must posses other qualifications prescribed by Parliament.

The Parliament has laid down the following additional qualifications in the Representation of People Act (1951).
1. He must be registered as an elector for a parliamentary constituency. This is same in the case of both, the Rajya Sabha and the Lok Sabha. The requirement that a candidate contesting an election to the Rajya Sabha from a particular state should be an elector in that particular state was dispensed with in 2003. In 2006, the Supreme Court upheld the constitutional validity of this change. 
2. He must be a member of a scheduled caste or scheduled tribe in any state or union territory, if he wants to contest a seat reserved for them. However, a member of scheduled castes or scheduled tribes can also contest a seat not reserved for them.

Disqualifications for membership of parliament:
Under the Constitution, a person shall be disqualified for being elected as a member of Parliament:
1. if he holds any office of profit under the Union or state government (except that of a minister or any other office exempted by Parliament).
2. if he is of unsound mind and stands so declared by a court.
3. if he is an undischarged insolvent.
4. if he is not a citizen of India or has voluntarily acquired the citizenship of a foreign state or is under any acknowledgement of allegiance to a foreign state; and
5. if he is so disqualified under any law made by Parliament.

The Parliament has laid down the following additional disqualifications in the Representation of People Act (1951):
1. He must not have been found guilty of certain election offences or corrupt practices in the elections. 
2. He must not have been convicted for any offence resulting in imprisonment for two or more years. But, the detention of a person under a preventive detention law is not a disqualification. 
3. He must not have failed to lodge an account of his election expenses within the time. 
4. He must not have any interest in government contracts, works or services. 
5. He must not be a director or managing agent nor hold an office of profit in a corporation in which the government has at least 25 per cent share. 
6. He must not have been dismissed from government service for corruption or disloyalty to the State. 
7. He must not have been convicted for promoting enmity between different groups or for the offence of bribery. 
8. He must not have been punished for preaching and practising social crimes such as untouchability, dowry and sati.
On the question whether a member is subject to any of the above disqualifications, the president’s decision is final. However, he should obtain the opinion of the election commission and act accordingly.

Disqualification on Ground of Defection:
The Constitution also lays down that a person shall be disqualified from being a member of Parliament if he is so disqualified on the ground of defection under the provisions of the Tenth Schedule. A member incurs disqualification under the defection law:
1. if he voluntary gives up the membership of the political party on whose ticket he is elected to the House; 
2. if he votes or abstains from voting in the House contrary to any direction given by his political party; 
3. if any independently elected member joins any political party; and 
4. if any nominated member joins any political party after the expiry of six months.
The question of disqualification under the Tenth Schedule is decided by the Chairman in the case of Rajya Sabha and Speaker in the case of Lok Sabha (and not by the president of India). In 1992, the Supreme Court ruled that the decision of the Chairman/ Speaker in this regard is subject to judicial review.

Vacating of Seats:
In the following cases, a member of Parliament vacates his seat.
1. Double Membership:
A person cannot be a member of both Houses of Parliament at the same time. Thus, the Representation of People Act (1951) provides for the following:
(a) If a person is elected to both the Houses of Parliament, he must intimate within 10 days in which House he desires to serve. In default of such intimation, his seat in the Rajya Sabha becomes vacant. 
(b) If a sitting member of one House is also elected to the other House, his seat in the first House becomes vacant. 
(c) If a person is elected to two seats in a House, he should exercise his option for one. Otherwise, both seats become vacant.
Similarly, a person cannot be a member of both the Parliament and the state legislature at the same time. If a person is so elected, his seat in Parliament becomes vacant if he does not resign his seat in the state legislature within 14 days.

2. Disqualification:
If a member of Parliament becomes subject to any of the disqualifications specified in the Constitution, his seat becomes vacant. Here, the list of disqualifications also include the disqualification on the grounds of defection under the provisions of the Tenth Schedule of the Constitution.

3. Resignation:
A member may resign his seat by writing to the Chairman of Rajya Sabha or Speaker of Lok Sabha, as the case may be. The seat falls vacant when the resignation is accepted. However, the Chairman/ Speaker may not accept the resignation if he is satisfied that it is not voluntary or genuine.

4. Absence:
A House can declare the seat of a member vacant if he is absent from all its meetings for a period of sixty days without its permission. In computing the period of sixty days, no account shall be taken of any period during which the House is prorogued or adjourned for more than four consecutive days.

5. Other cases:
A member has to vacate his seat in the Parliament:
(a) if his election is declared void by the court;
(b) if he is expelled by the House;
(c) if he is elected to the office of President or Vice-President; and
(d) if he is appointed to the office of governor of a state.

If a disqualified person is elected to the Parliament, the Constitution lays down no procedure to declare the election void. This matter is dealt by the Representation of the People Act (1951), which enables the high court to declare an election void if a disqualified candidate is elected. The aggrieved party can appeal to the Supreme Court against the order of the high court in this regard.

Oath or Affirmation:
Every member of either House of Parliament, before taking his seat in the House, has to make and subscribe to an oath or affirmation before the President or some person appointed by him for this purpose. In his oath or affirmation, a member of Parliament swears:
1. to bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of India;
2. to uphold the sovereignty and integrity of India; and
3. to faithfully discharge the duty upon which he is about to enter.
Unless a member takes the oath, he cannot vote and participate in the proceedings of the House and does not become eligible to parliamentary privileges and immunities. A person is liable to a penalty of Rs. 500 for each day he sits or votes as a member in a House in the following conditions:
1. Before taking and subscribing to the prescribed oath or affirmation; or
2. When he knows that he is not qualified or that he is disqualified for its membership; or
3. When he knows that he is prohibited from sitting or voting in the House by virtue of any parliamentary law.

Salaries and Allowances:
Members of either House of Parliament are entitled to receive such salaries and allowances as may be determined by Parliament, and there is no provision of pension in the Constitution. However, Parliament has provided pension to the members.
 In 1954, the Parliament enacted the Salaries, Allowances and Pension of Members of Parliament Act. In 2018, the salary of members was increased from Rs. 50,000 to Rs. 1,00,000 per month, the constituency allowance from Rs. 45,000 to Rs. 70,000 per month and the office expenses allowance from Rs. 45,000 to Rs. 60,000 per month. Earlier in 2010, the daily allowance was increased from Rs. 1,000 to Rs. 2,000 for each day of residence on duty. From 1976, the members are also entitled to a pension on a graduated scale for each five-year-term as members of either House of Parliament. Besides, they are provided with travelling facilities, free accommodation, telephone, vehicle advance, medical facilities and so on.

The salaries and allowances of the Speaker and Deputy Speaker of Lok Sabha and the Chairman and Deputy Chairman of Rajya Sabha are also determined by Parliament. They are charged on the Consolidated Fund of India and thus are not subject to the annual vote of Parliament.

In 1953, the Parliament enacted the Salaries and Allowances of Officers of Parliament Act. Under this Act, “Officer of Parliament” means any of the following officers, namely, the Chairman and Deputy Chairman of the Rajya Sabha and the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker of the Lok Sabha. In 2018, the Parliament increased the salary of the Chairman of the Rajya Sabha from Rs.1.25 lakh to Rs. 4 lakh per month9a. Similarly, other Officers of Parliament (i.e., the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker of the Lok Sabha and the Deputy Chairman of the Rajya Sabha) are entitled to receive a salary per month at the same rates as are payable to the Members of Parliament. Further, each Officer of Parliament (other than the Chairman of the Rajya Sabha) is entitled to receive a daily allowance (for each day during the whole of his term) at the same rate as is payable to the Members of Parliament.9c Also, each Officer of Parliament (other than the Chairman of the Rajya Sabha) is entitled to receive a constituency allowance at the same rate as is payable to the Members of Parliament.
According to the same Act, the sumptuary allowance is paid to the Speaker of the Lok Sabha at the same rate as is payable to a Cabinet Minister9e (i.e., Rs.2,000 per month). Likewise, the sumptuary allowance is paid to the Deputy Speaker of the Lok Sabha and the Deputy Chairman of the Rajya Sabha at the same rate as is payable to a Minister of State9f (i.e., Rs. 1000 per month).

PRESIDING OFFICERS OF PARLIAMENT:
Each House of Parliament has its own presiding officer. There is a Speaker and a Deputy Speaker for the Lok Sabha and a Chairman and a Deputy Chairman for the Rajya Sabha. A panel of chairpersons for the Lok Sabha and a panel of vice-chairpersons for the Rajya Sabha is also appointed.

Speaker of Lok Sabha:
Election and Tenure of Speaker of Lok Sabha:
The Speaker is elected by the Lok Sabha from amongst its members (as soon as may be, after its first sitting). Whenever the office of the Speaker falls vacant, the Lok Sabha elects another member to fill the vacancy. The date of election of the Speaker is fixed by the President.
Usually, the Speaker remains in office during the life of the Lok Sabha. However, he has to vacate his office earlier in any of the following three cases:
1. if he ceases to be a member of the Lok Sabha;
2. if he resigns by writing to the Deputy Speaker; and
3. if he is removed by a resolution passed by a majority of all then members of the Lok Sabha. Such a resolution can be moved only after giving 14 days’ advance notice.
When a resolution for the removal of the Speaker is under consideration of the House, he cannot preside at the sitting of the House, though he may be present. However, he can speak and take part in the proceedings of the House at such a time and vote in the first instance, though not in the case of an equality of votes. It should be noted here that, whenever the Lok Sabha is dissolved, the Speaker does not vacate his office and continues till the newly-elected Lok Sabha meets.

Role, Powers and Functions of Speaker of Lok Sabha:
The Speaker is the head of the Lok Sabha, and its representative. He is the guardian of powers and privileges of the members, the House as a whole and its committees. He is the principal spokesman of the House, and his decision in all Parliamentary matters is final. He is thus much more than merely the presiding officer of the Lok Sabha. In these capacities, he is vested with vast, varied and vital responsibilities and enjoys great honour, high dignity and supreme authority within the House.
The Speaker of the Lok Sabha derives his powers and duties from three sources, that is, the Constitution of India, the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business of Lok Sabha, and Parliamentary Conventions (residuary powers that are unwritten or unspecified in the Rules). Altogether, he has the following powers and duties:
1. He maintains order and decorum in the House for conducting its business and regulating its proceedings. This is his primary responsibility and he has final power in this regard.
2. He is the final interpreter of the provisions of
(a) the Constitution of India, 
(b) the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business of Lok Sabha, and 
(c) the parliamentary precedents, within the House.
3. He adjourns the House or suspends the meeting in absence of a quorum. The quorum to constitute a meeting of the House is one-tenth of the total strength of the House.
4. He does not vote in the first instance. But he can exercise a casting vote in the case of a tie. In other words, only when the House is divided equally on any question, the Speaker is entitled to vote. Such vote is called casting vote, and its purpose is to resolve a deadlock.
5. He presides over a joint setting of the two Houses of Parliament. Such a sitting is summoned by the President to settle a deadlock between the two Houses on a bill.
6. He can allow a ‘secret’ sitting of the House at the request of the Leader of the House. When the House sits in secret, no stranger can be present in the chamber, lobby or galleries except with the permission of the Speaker. 
7. He decides whether a bill is a money bill or not and his decision on this question is final. When a money bill is transmitted to the Rajya Sabha for recommendation and presented to the President for assent, the Speaker endorses on the bill his certificate that it is a money bill. 
8. He decides the questions of disqualification of a member of the Lok Sabha, arising on the ground of defection under the provisions of the Tenth Schedule. In 1992, the Supreme Court ruled that the decision of the Speaker in this regard is subject to judicial review. 
9. He acts as the ex-officio chairman of the Indian Parliamentary Group which is a link between the Parliament of India and the various parliaments of the world. He also acts as the ex-officio chairman of the conference of presiding officers of legislative bodies in the country. 
10. He appoints the chairman of all the parliamentary committees of the Lok Sabha and supervises their functioning. He himself is the chairman of the Business Advisory Committee, the Rules Committee and the General Purpose Committee.

Independence and Impartiality:
As the office of the Speaker is vested with great prestige, position and authority, independence and impartiality becomes its sine qua non.
The following provisions ensure the independence and impartiality of the office of the Speaker:
1. He is provided with a security of tenure. He can be removed only by a resolution passed by the Lok Sabha by a special majority (ie, a majority of all the then members of the House) and not by an ordinary majority (ie, a majority of the members present and voting in the House). This motion of removal can be considered and discussed only when it has the support of at least 50 members. 
2. His salaries and allowances are fixed by Parliament. They are charged on the Consolidated Fund of India and thus are not subject to the annual vote of Parliament. 
3. His work and conduct cannot be discussed and criticised in the Lok Sabha except on a substantive motion. 
4. His powers of regulating procedure or conducting business or maintaining order in the House are not subject to the jurisdiction of any Court. 
5. He cannot vote in the first instance. He can only exercise a casting vote in the event of a tie. This makes the position of Speaker impartial. 
6. He is given a very high position in the order of precedence. He is placed at seventh rank, along with the Chief Justice of India. This means, he has a higher rank than all cabinet ministers, except the Prime Minister or Deputy Prime Minister.

In Britain, the Speaker is strictly a nonparty man. There is a convention that the Speaker has to resign from his party and remain politically neutral. This healthy convention is not fully established in India where the Speaker does not resign from the membership of his party on his election to the exalted office.

Deputy Speaker of Lok Sabha:
Like the Speaker, the Deputy Speaker is also elected by the Lok Sabha itself from amongst its members. He is elected after the election of the Speaker has taken place. The date of election of the Deputy Speaker is fixed by the Speaker. Whenever the office of the Deputy Speaker falls vacant, the Lok Sabha elects another member to fill the vacancy.
 Like the Speaker, the Deputy Speaker remains in office usually during the life of the Lok Sabha. However, he may vacate his office earlier in any of the following three cases:
1. if he ceases to be a member of the Lok Sabha;
2. if he resigns by writing to the Speaker; and
3. if he is removed by a resolution passed by a majority of all the then members of the Lok Sabha. Such a resolution can be moved only after giving 14 days’ advance notice.

The Deputy Speaker performs the duties of the Speaker’s office when it is vacant. He also acts as the Speaker when the latter is absent from the sitting of the House. In both the cases, he assumes all the powers of the Speaker. He also presides over the joint sitting of both the Houses of Parliament, in case the Speaker is absent from such a sitting.
It should be noted here that the Deputy Speaker is not subordinate to the Speaker. He is directly responsible to the House.
The Deputy Speaker has one special privilege, that is, whenever he is appointed as a member of a parliamentary committee, he automatically becomes its chairman.
Like the Speaker, the Deputy Speaker, while presiding over the House, cannot vote in the first instance; he can only exercise a casting vote in the case of a tie. Further, when a resolution for the removal of the Deputy Speaker is under consideration of the House, he cannot preside at the sitting of the House, though he may be present.
When the Speaker presides over the House, the Deputy Speaker is like any other ordinary member of the House. He can speak in the House, participate in its proceedings and vote on any question before the House.
The Deputy Speaker is entitled to a regular salary and allowance fixed by Parliament, and charged on the Consolidated Fund of India.
Upto the 10th Lok Sabha, both the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker were usually from the ruling party. Since the 11th Lok Sabha, there has been a consensus that the Speaker comes from the ruling party (or ruling alliance) and the post of Deputy Speaker goes to the main opposition party.
The Speaker and the Deputy Speaker, while assuming their offices, do not make and subscribe any separate oath or affirmation.
The institutions of Speaker and Deputy Speaker originated in India in 1921 under the provisions of the Government of India Act of 1919 (Montague-Chelmsford Reforms). At that time, the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker were called the President and Deputy President respectively and the same nomenclature continued till 1947. Before 1921, the Governor-General of India used to preside over the meetings of the Central Legislative Council. In 1921, the Frederick Whyte and Sachidanand Sinha were appointed by the Governor-General of India as the first Speaker and the first Deputy Speaker (respectively) of the central legislative assembly. In 1925, Vithalbhai J. Patel became the first Indian and the first elected Speaker of the central legislative assembly. The Government of India Act of 1935 changed the nomenclatures of President and Deputy President of the Central Legislative Assembly to the Speaker and Deputy Speaker respectively. However, the old nomenclature continued till 1947 as the federal part of the 1935 Act was not implemented. G.V. Mavalankar and Ananthasayanam Ayyangar had the distinction of being the first Speaker and the first Deputy Speaker (respectively) of the Lok Sabha. G.V. Mavalankar also held the post of Speaker in the Constituent Assembly (Legislative) as well as the provisional Parliament. He held the post of Speaker of Lok Sabha continuously for one decade from 1946 to 1956.

Panel of Chairpersons of Lok Sabha:
Under the Rules of Lok Sabha, the Speaker nominates from amongst the members a panel of not more than ten chairpersons. Any of them can preside over the House in the absence of the Speaker or the Deputy Speaker. He has the same powers as the Speaker when so presiding. He holds office until a new panel of chairpersons is nominated. When a member of the panel of chairpersons is also not present, any other person as determined by House acts as the Speaker.
It must be emphasised here that a member of the panel of chairpersons cannot preside over the House, when the office of the Speaker or the Deputy Speaker is vacant. During such time, the Speaker’s duties are to be performed by such member of the House as the President may appoint for the purpose. The elections are held, as soon as possible, to fill the vacant posts.

Speaker Pro Tem:
As provided by the Constitution, the Speaker of the last Lok Sabha vacates his office immediately before the first meeting of the newly-elected Lok Sabha. Therefore, the President appoints a member of the Lok Sabha as the Speaker Pro Tem. Usually, the seniormost member is selected for this. The President himself administers oath to the Speaker Pro Tem.
The Speaker Pro Tem has all the powers of the Speaker. He presides over the first sitting of the newly-elected Lok Sabha. His main duty is to administer oath to the new members. He also enables the House to elect the new Speaker. When the new Speaker is elected by the House, the office of the Speaker Pro Tem ceases to exist. Hence, this office is a temporary office, existing for a few days.

Chairman of Rajya Sabha:
The presiding officer of the Rajya Sabha is known as the Chairman. The vice-president of India is the ex-officio Chairman of the Rajya Sabha. During any period when the VicePresident acts as President or discharges the functions of the President, he does not perform the duties of the office of the Chairman of Rajya Sabha.
The Chairman of the Rajya Sabha can be removed from his office only if he is removed from the office of the Vice-President. As a presiding officer, the powers and functions of the Chairman in the Rajya Sabha are similar to those of the Speaker in the Lok Sabha. However, the Speaker has two special powers which are not enjoyed by the Chairman:
1. The Speaker decides whether a bill is a money bill or not and his decision on this question is final.
2. The Speaker presides over a joint sitting of two Houses of Parliament.

Unlike the Speaker (who is a member of the House), the Chairman is not a member of the House. But like the Speaker, the Chairman also cannot vote in the first instance. He too can cast a vote in the case of an equality of votes.
The Vice-President cannot preside over a sitting of the Rajya Sabha as its Chairman when a resolution for his removal is under consideration. However, he can be present and speak in the House and can take part in its proceedings, without voting, even at such a time (while the Speaker can vote in the first instance when a resolution for his removal is under consideration of the Lok Sabha).
As in case of the Speaker, the salaries and allowances of the Chairman are also fixed by the Parliament. They are charged on the Consolidated Fund of India and thus are not subject to the annual vote of Parliament.

During any period when the Vice-President acts as President or discharges the functions of the President, he is not entitled to any salary or allowance payable to the Chairman of the Rajya Sabha. But he is paid the salary and allowance of the President during such a time.

Deputy Chairman of Rajya Sabha:
The Deputy Chairman is elected by the Rajya Sabha itself from amongst its members. Whenever the office of the Deputy Chairman falls vacant, the Rajya Sabha elects another member to fill the vacancy.
The Deputy Chairman vacates his office in any of the following three cases:
1. if he ceases to be a member of the Rajya Sabha;
2. if he resigns by writing to the Chairman; and
3. if he is removed by a resolution passed by a majority of all the then members of the Rajya Sabha. Such a resolution can be moved only after giving 14 days’ advance notice.
The Deputy Chairman performs the duties of the Chairman’s office when it is vacant or when the Vice-President acts as President or discharges the functions of the President. He also acts as the Chairman when the latter is absent from the sitting of the House. In both the cases, he has all the powers of the Chairman.
It should be emphasised here that the Deputy Chairman is not subordinate to the Chairman. He is directly responsible to the Rajya Sabha.
Like the Chairman, the Deputy Chairman, while presiding over the House, cannot vote in the first instance; he can only exercise a casting vote in the case of a tie. Further, when a resolution for the removal of the Deputy Chairman is under consideration of the House, he cannot preside over a sitting of the House, though he may be present.
When the Chairman presides over the House, the Deputy Chairman is like any other ordinary member of the House. He can speak in the House, participate in its proceedings and vote on any question before the House.
Like the Chairman, the Deputy Chairman is also entitled to a regular salary and allowance. They are fixed by Parliament and are charged on the Consolidated Fund of India.

Panel of Vice-Chairpersons of Rajya Sabha:
Under the Rules of Rajya Sabha, the Chairman nominates from amongst the members a panel of vice-chairpersons. Any one of them can preside over the House in the absence of the Chairman or the Deputy Chairman. He has the same powers as the Chairman when so presiding. He holds office until a new panel of vice-chairpersons is nominated.
When a member of the panel of vicechairpersons is also not present, any other person as determined by the House acts as the Chairman.
 It must be emphasised here that a member of the panel of vicechairpersons cannot preside over the House, when the office of the Chairman or the Deputy Chairman is vacant. During such time, the Chairman’s duties are to be performed by such member of the House as the president may appoint for the purpose. The elections are held, as soon as possible, to fill the vacant posts.

Secretariat of Parliament:
Each House of Parliament has separate secretarial staff of its own, though there can be some posts common to both the Houses. Their recruitment and service conditions are regulated by Parliament. The secretariat of each House is headed by a secretary-general. He is a permanent officer and is appointed by the presiding officer of the House.

LEADERS IN PARLIAMENT
Leader of the House:
Under the Rules of Lok Sabha, the ‘Leader of the House’ means the prime minister, if he is a member of the Lok Sabha, or a minister who is a member of the Lok Sabha and is nominated by the prime minister to function as the Leader of the House. There is also a ‘Leader of the House’ in the Rajya Sabha. He is a minister and a member of the Rajya Sabha and is nominated by the prime minister to function as such. The leader of the house in either House is an important functionary and exercises direct influence on the conduct of business. He can also nominate a deputy leader of the House. The same functionary in USA is known as the ‘majority leader’.

Leader of the Opposition:
In each House of Parliament, there is the ‘Leader of the Opposition’. The leader of the largest Opposition party having not less than one-tenth seats of the total strength of the House is recognised as the leader of the Opposition in that House. In a parliamentary system of government, the leader of the opposition has a significant role to play. His main functions are to provide a constructive criticism of the policies of the government and to provide an alternative government. Therefore, the leader of Opposition in the Lok Sabha and the Rajya Sabha were accorded statutory recognition in 1977. They are also entitled to the salary, allowances and other facilities equivalent to that of a cabinet minister. It was in 1969 that an official leader of the opposition was recognised for the first time. The same functionary in USA is known as the ‘minority leader’.
The British political system has an unique institution called the ‘Shadow Cabinet’. It is formed by the Opposition party to balance the ruling cabinet and to prepare its members for future ministerial offices. In this shadow cabinet, almost every member in the ruling cabinet is ‘shadowed’ by a corresponding member in the opposition cabinet. This shadow cabinet serves as the ‘alternate cabinet’ if there is change of government. That is why Ivor Jennings described the leader of Opposition as the ‘alternative Prime Minister’. He enjoys the status of a minister and is paid by the government.

Whip:
Though the offices of the leader of the House and the leader of the Opposition are not mentioned in the Constitution of India, they are mentioned in the Rules of the House and Parliamentary Statute respectively. The office of ‘whip’, on the other hand, is mentioned neither in the Constitution of India nor in the Rules of the House nor in a Parliamentary Statute. It is based on the conventions of the parliamentary government.
Every political party, whether ruling or Opposition has its own whip in the Parliament. He is appointed by the political party to serve as an assistant floor leader. He is charged with the responsibility of ensuring the attendance of his party members in large numbers and securing their support in favour of or against a particular issue. He regulates and monitors their behaviour in the Parliament. The members are supposed to follow the directives given by the whip. Otherwise, disciplinary action can be taken.

SESSIONS OF PARLIAMENT:
Summoning:
The president from time to time summons each House of Parliament to meet. But, the maximum gap between two sessions of Parliament cannot be more than six months. In other words, the Parliament should meet at least twice ayear. There are usually three sessions in a year, viz,
1. the Budget Session (February to May);
2. the Monsoon Session (July to September); and
3. the Winter Session (November to December).
A ‘session’ of Parliament is the period spanning between the first sitting of a House and its prorogation (or dissolution in the case of the Lok Sabha). During a session, the House meets everyday to transact business. The period spanning between the prorogation of a House and its reassembly in a new session is called ‘recess’.

Adjournment:
A session of Parliament consists of many meetings. Each meeting of a day consists of two sittings, that is, a morning sitting from 11 am to 1 pm and post-lunch sitting from 2 pm to 6 pm. A sitting of Parliament can be terminated by adjournment or adjournment sine die or prorogation or dissolution (in the case of the Lok Sabha). An adjournment suspends the work in a sitting for a specified time, which may be hours, days or weeks.

Adjournment Sine Die:
Adjournment sine die means terminating a sitting of Parliament for an indefinite period. In other words, when the House is adjourned without naming a day for reassembly, it is called adjournment sine die. The power of adjournment as well as adjournment sine die lies with the presiding officer of the House. He can also call a sitting of the House before the date or time to which it has been adjourned or at any time after the House has been adjourned sine die.

Prorogation:
The presiding officer (Speaker or Chairman) declares the House adjourned sine die, when the business of a session is completed. Within the next few days, the President issues a notification for prorogation of the session. However, the President can also prorogue the House while in session.

Dissolution:
Rajya Sabha, being a permanent House, is not subject to dissolution. Only the Lok Sabha is subject to dissolution. Unlike a prorogation, a dissolution ends the very life of the existing House, and a new House is constituted after general elections are held. The dissolution of the Lok Sabha may take place in either of two ways:
1. Automatic dissolution, that is, on the expiry of its tenure of five years or the terms as extended during a national emergency; or
2. Whenever the President decides to dissolve the House, which he is authorised to do. Once the Lok Sabha is dissolved before the completion of its normal tenure, the dissolution is irrevocable.

When the Lok Sabha is dissolved, all business including bills, motions, resolutions, notices, petitions and so on pending before it or its committees lapse. They (to be pursued further) must be reintroduced in the newly-constituted Lok Sabha. However, some pending bills and all pending assurances that are to be examined by the Committee on Government Assurances do not lapse on the dissolution of the Lok Sabha. The position with respect to lapsing of bills is as follows:
1. A bill pending in the Lok Sabha lapses (whether originating in the Lok Sabha or transmitted to it by the Rajya Sabha). 
2. A bill passed by the Lok Sabha but pending in the Rajya Sabha lapses. 
3. A bill not passed by the two Houses due to disagreement and if the president has notified the holding of a joint sitting before the dissolution of Lok Sabha, does not lapse. 
4. A bill pending in the Rajya Sabha but not passed by the Lok Sabha does not lapse. 
5. A bill passed by both Houses but pending assent of the president does not lapse. 
6. A bill passed by both Houses but returned by the president for reconsideration of Houses does not lapse.

Quorum:
Quorum is the minimum number of members required to be present in the House before it can transact any business. It is one- tenth of the total number of members in each House including the presiding officer. It means that there must be at least 55 members present in the Lok Sabha and 25 members present in the Rajya Sabha, if any business is to be conducted. If there is no quorum during a meeting of the House, it is the duty of the presiding officer either to adjourn the House or to suspend the meeting until there is a quorum.

Voting in House:
All matters at any sitting of either House or joint sitting of both the Houses are decided by a majority of votes of the members present and voting, excluding the presiding officer. Only a few matters, which are specifically mentioned in the Constitution like impeachment of the President, amendment of the Constitution, removal of the presiding officers of the Parliament and so on, require special majority, not ordinary majority.
The presiding officer of a House does not vote in the first instance, but exercises a casting vote in the case of an equality of votes. The proceedings of a House are to be valid irrespective of any unauthorised voting or participation or any vacancy in its membership.

The following points can be noted with respect to the voting procedure in the Lok Sabha:
1. On the conclusion of a debate, the Speaker shall put the question and invite those who are in favour of the motion to say ‘Aye’ and those against the motion to say ‘No’. 
2. The Speaker shall then say: ‘I think the Ayes (or the Noes, as the case may be) have it.’ If the opinion of the Speaker as to the decision of a question is not challenged, he shall say twice: The Ayes (or the Noes, as the case may be) have it’ and the question before the House shall be determined accordingly. 
3. (a) If the opinion of the Speaker as to the decision of a question is challenged, he shall order that the Lobby be cleared. 
(b) After the lapse of three minutes and thirty seconds, he shall put the question a second time and declare whether in his opinion the ‘Ayes’ or the ‘Noes’ have it. 
(c) If the opinion so declared is again challenged, he shall direct that the votes be recorded either by operating the automatic vote recorder or by using ‘Aye’ and ‘No’ Slips in the House or by the Members going into the Lobbies. 
4. If in the opinion of the Speaker, the Division is unnecessarily claimed, he may ask the members who are for ‘Aye’ and those for ‘No’ respectively to rise in their places and, on a count being taken, he may declare the determination of the House. In such a case, the names of the voters shall not be recorded.

Language in Parliament:
The Constitution has declared Hindi and English to be the languages for transacting business in the Parliament. However, the presiding officer can permit a member to address the House in his mother-tongue. In both the Houses, arrangements are made for simultaneous translation. Though English was to be discontinued as a floor language after the expiration of fifteen years from the commencement of the Constitution (that is, in 1965), the Official Languages Act (1963) allowed English to be continued along with Hindi.

Rights of Ministers and Attorney General:
In addition to the members of a House, every minister and the attorney general of India have the right to speak and take part in the proceedings of either House, any joint sitting of both the Houses and any committee of Parliament of which he is a member, without being entitled to vote. There are two reasons underlying this constitutional provision:
1. A minister can participate in the proceedings of a House, of which he is not a member. In other words, a minister belonging to the Lok Sabha can participate in the proceedings of the Rajya Sabha and vice-versa.
2. A minister, who is not a member of either House, can participate in the proceedings of both the Houses. It should be noted here that a person can remain a minister for six months, without being a member of either House of Parliament.

Lame-duck Session:
It refers to the last session of the existing Lok Sabha, after a new Lok Sabha has been elected. Those members of the existing Lok Sabha who could not get re-elected to the new Lok Sabha are called lame-ducks.

DEVICES OF PARLIAMENTARY PROCEEDINGS:
Question Hour:
The first hour of every parliamentary sitting is slotted for this. During this time, the members ask questions and the ministers usually give answers. The questions are of three kinds, namely, starred, unstarred and short notice.
A starred question (distinguished by an asterisk) requires an oral answer and hence supplementary questions can follow. An unstarred question, on the other hand, requires a written answer and hence, supplementary questions cannot follow. A short notice question is one that is asked by giving a notice of less than ten days. It is answered orally.
In addition to the ministers, the questions can also be asked to the private members. Thus, a question may be addressed to a private member if the subject matter of the question relates to some Bill, resolution or other matter connected with the business of the House for which that member is responsible. The procedure in regard to such question is the same as that followed in the case of questions addressed to a minister.
The list of starred, unstarred, short notice questions and questions to private members are printed in green, white, light pink and yellow colour, respectively, to distinguish them from one another.

Zero Hour:
Unlike the question hour, the zero hour is not mentioned in the Rules of Procedure. Thus it is an informal device available to the members of the Parliament to raise matters without any prior notice. The zero hour starts immediately after the question hour and lasts until the agenda for the day (ie, regular business of the House) is taken up. In other words, the time gap between the question hour and the agenda is known as zero hour. It is an Indian innovation in the field of parliamentary procedures and has been in existence since 1962.

Motions:
No discussion on a matter of general public importance can take place except on a motion made with the consent of the presiding officer. The House expresses its decisions or opinions on various issues through the adoption or rejection of motions moved by either ministers or private members.
The motions moved by the members to raise discussions on various matters fall into three principal categories:
1. Substantive Motion: It is a self-contained independent proposal dealing with a very important matter like impeachment of the President or removal of Chief Election Commissioner. 
2. Substitute Motion: It is a motion that is moved in substitution of an original motion and proposes an alternative to it. If adopted by the House, it supersedes the original motion. 
3. Subsidiary Motion: It is a motion that, by itself, has no meaning and cannot state the decision of the House without reference to the original motion or proceedings of the House.
It is divided into three sub-categories:
(a) Ancillary Motion: It is used as the regular way of proceeding with various kinds of business.
(b) Superseding Motion: It is moved in the course of debate on another issue and seeks to supersede that issue.
(c) Amendment: It seeks to modify or substitute only a part of the original motion.

Closure Motion:
Closure Motion is a motion moved by a member to cut short the debate on a matter before the House. If the motion is approved by the House, debate is stopped forthwith and the matter is put to vote. There are four kinds of closure motions:
(a) Simple Closure: It is one when a member moves that the ‘matter having been sufficiently discussed be now put to vote’. 
(b) Closure by Compartments: In this case, the clauses of a bill or a lengthy resolution are grouped into parts before the commencement of the debate. The debate covers the part as a whole and the entire part is put to vote. 
(c) Kangaroo Closure: Under this type, only important clauses are taken up for debate and voting and the intervening clauses are skipped over and taken as passed. 
(d) Guillotine Closure: It is one when the undiscussed clauses of a bill or a resolution are also put to vote along with the discussed ones due to want of time (as the time allotted for the discussion is over).

Privilege Motion:
Privilege Motion is concerned with the breach of parliamentary privileges by a minister. It is moved by a member when he feels that a minister has committed a breach of privilege of the House or one or more of its members by withholding facts of a case or by giving wrong or distorted facts. Its purpose is to censure the concerned minister.

Calling Attention Motion:
Calling Attention Motion is introduced in the Parliament by a member to call the attention of a minister to a matter of urgent public importance, and to seek an authoritative statement from him on that matter. Like the zero hour, it is also an Indian innovation in the parliamentary procedure and has been in existence since 1954. However, unlike the zero hour, it is mentioned in the Rules of Procedure.

Adjournment Motion:
Adjournment Motion is introduced in the Parliament to draw attention of the House to a definite matter of urgent public importance, and needs the support of 50 members to be admitted. As it interrupts the normal business of the House, it is regarded as an extraordinary device. It involves an element of censure against the government and hence Rajya Sabha is not permitted to make use of this device. The discussion on an adjournment motion should last for not less than two hours and thirty minutes.
The right to move a motion for an adjournment of the business of the House is subject to the following restrictions:
1. It should raise a matter which is definite, factual, urgent and of public importance; 
2. It should not cover more than one matter; 
3. It should be restricted to a specific matter of recent occurrence and should not be framed in general terms; 
4. It should not raise a question of privilege; 
5. It should not revive discussion on a matter that has been discussed in the same session; 
6. It should not deal with any matter that is under adjudication by court; and 
7. It should not raise any question that can be raised on a distinct motion.

No-Confidence Motion:
Article 75 of the Constitution says that the council of ministers shall be collectively responsible to the Lok Sabha. It means that the ministry stays in office so long as it enjoys confidence of the majority of the members of the Lok Sabha. In other words, the Lok Sabha can remove the ministry from office by passing a noconfidence motion. The motion needs the support of 50 members to be admitted.

Confidence Motion:
The motion of confidence has come up as a new procedural device to cope with the emerging situations of fractured mandates resulting in hung parliament, minority governments and coalition governments. The governments formed with wafer-thin majority have been called upon by the President to prove their majority on the floor of the House. The government of the day, sometimes, on its own, seeks to prove its majority by moving a motion of confidence and winning the confidence of the House. If the confidence motion is negatived, it results in the fall of the government.

Censure Motion
A censure motion is different from a no-confidence motion

Motion of Thanks:
The first session after each general election and the first session of every fiscal year is addressed by the president. In this address, the president outlines the policies and programmes of the government in the preceding year and ensuing year. This address of the president, which corresponds to the ‘speech from the Throne in Britain’, is discussed in both the Houses of Parliament on a motion called the ‘Motion of Thanks’. At the end of the discussion, the motion is put to vote. This motion must be passed in the House. Otherwise, it amounts to the defeat of the government. This inaugural speech of the president is an occasion available to the members of Parliament to raise discussions and debates to examine and criticise the government and administration for its lapses and failures.

No-Day-Yet-Named Motion:
No-Day-Yet-Named Motion is a motion that has been admitted by the Speaker but no date has been fixed for its discussion. The Speaker, after considering the state of business in the House and in consultation with the leader of the House or on the recommendation of the Business Advisory Committee, allots a day or days or part of a day for the discussion of such a motion. 

Dilatory Motion:
Dilatory Motion is a motion for the adjournment of the debate on a bill / motion / resolution etc. or a motion to retard or delay the progress of a business under consideration of the House. It can be moved by a member at any time after a motion has been made. The debate on a dilatory motion must be restricted to the matter contained in such motion. If the Speaker is of the opinion that such a motion is an abuse of the rules of the House, he may either forthwith put the question thereon or decline to propose the question.

Point of Order:
A member can raise a point of order when the proceedings of the House do not follow the normal rules of procedure. A point of order should relate to the interpretation or enforcement of the Rules of the House or such articles of the Constitution that regulate the business of the House and should raise a question that is within the cognizance of the Speaker. It is usually raised by an opposition member in order to control the government. It is an extraordinary device as it suspends the proceedings before the House. No debate is allowed on a point of order.

Half-an-Hour Discussion:
Half-an-Hour Discussion is meant for discussing a matter of sufficient public importance, which has been subjected to a lot of debate and the answer to which needs elucidation on a matter of fact. The Speaker can allot three days in a week for such discussions. There is no formal motion or voting before the House.

Short Duration Discussion:
Short Duration Discussion is also known as two-hour discussion as the time allotted for such a discussion should not exceed two hours. The members of the Parliament can raise such discussions on a matter of urgent public importance. The Speaker can allot two days in a week for such discussions. There is neither a formal motion before the house nor voting. This device has been in existence since 1953.

Special Mention:
A matter which is not a point of order or which cannot be raised during question hour, half-an hour discussion, short duration discussion or under adjournment motion, calling attention notice or under any rule of the House can be raised under the special mention in the Rajya Sabha. Its equivalent procedural device in the Lok Sabha is known as ‘Notice (Mention) Under Rule 377’.

Resolutions:
The members can move resolutions to draw the attention of the House or the government to matters of general public interest. The discussion on a resolution is strictly relevant to and within the scope of the resolution. A member who has moved a resolution or amendment to a resolution cannot withdraw the same except by leave of the House.
Resolutions are classified into three categories:
1. Private Member’s Resolution: It is one that is moved by a private member (other than a minister). It is discussed only on alternate Fridays and in the afternoon sitting. 
2. Government Resolution: It is one that is moved by a minister. It can be taken up any day from Monday to Thursday. 
3. Statutory Resolution: It can be moved either by a private member or a minister. It is so called because it is always tabled in pursuance of a provision in the Constitution or an Act of Parliament.
Resolutions are different from motions in the following respects: “All resolutions come in the category of substantive motions, that is to say, every resolution is a particular type of motion. All motions need not necessarily be substantive. Further, all motions are not necessarily put to vote of the House, whereas all the resolutions are required to be voted upon.”

Youth Parliament:
The scheme of Youth Parliament was started on the recommendation of the Fourth All India Whips Conference. Its objectives are:
1. to acquaint the younger generations with practices and procedures of Parliament; 
2. to imbibe the spirit of discipline and tolerance cultivating character in the minds of youth; and 
3. to inculcate in the student community the basic values of democracy and to enable them to acquire a proper perspective on the functioning of democratic institutions.
The ministry of parliamentary affairs provides necessary training and encouragement to the states in introducing the scheme.

LEGISLATIVE PROCEDURE IN PARLIAMENT:
The legislative procedure is identical in both the Houses of Parliament. Every bill has to pass through the same stages in each House. A bill is a proposal for legislation and it becomes an act or law when duly enacted.
Bills introduced in the Parliament are of two kinds: public bills and private bills (also known as government bills and private members’ bills respectively). Though both are governed by the same general procedure and pass through the same stages in the House, they differ in various respects.
The bills introduced in the Parliament can also be classified into four categories:
1. Ordinary bills, which are concerned with any matter other than financial subjects. 
2. Money bills, which are concerned with the financial matters like taxation, public expenditure, etc. 
3. Financial bills, which are also concerned with financial matters (but are different from money bills). 
4. Constitution amendment bills, which are concerned with the amendment of the provisions of the Constitution.
The Constitution has laid down separate procedures for the enactment of all the four types of bills. 

Ordinary Bills:
Every ordinary bill has to pass through the following five stages in the Parliament before it finds a place on the Statute Book:
1. First Reading:
An ordinary bill can be introduced in either House of Parliament. Such a bill can be introduced either by a minister or by any other member. The member who wants to introduce the bill has to ask for the leave of the House. When the House grants leave to introduce the bill, the mover of the bill introduces it by reading its title and objectives. No discussion on the bill takes place at this stage. Later, the bill is published in the Gazette of India. If a bill is published in the Gazette before its introduction, leave of the House to introduce the bill is not necessary. The introduction of the bill and its publication in the Gazette constitute the first reading of the bill.

2. Second Reading:
During this stage, the bill receives not only the general but also the detailed scrutiny and assumes its final shape. Hence, it forms the most important stage in the enactment of a bill. In fact, this stage involves three more sub-stages, namely, stage of general discussion, committee stage and consideration stage.
(a) Stage of General Discussion:
The printed copies of the bill are distributed to all the members. The principles of the bill and its provisions are discussed generally, but the details of the bill are not discussed. At this stage, the House can take any one of the following four actions:
(i) It may take the bill into consideration immediately or on some other fixed date; 
(ii) It may refer the bill to a select committee of the House; 
(iii) It may refer the bill to a joint committee of the two Houses; and 
(iv) It may circulate the bill to elicit public opinion. A Select Committee consists of members of the House where the bill has originated and a joint committee consists of members of both the Houses of Parliament.
(b) Committee Stage:
The usual practice is to refer the bill to a select committee of the House. This committee examines the bill thoroughly and in detail, clause by clause. It can also amend its provisions, but without altering the principles underlying it. After completing the scrutiny and discussion, the committee reports the bill back to the House.
(c) Consideration Stage:
The House, after receiving the bill from the select committee, considers the provisions of the bill clause by clause. Each clause is discussed and voted upon separately. The members can also move amendments and if accepted, they become part of the bill.

3. Third Reading:
At this stage, the debate is confined to the acceptance or rejection of the bill as a whole and no amendments are allowed, as the general principles underlying the bill have already been scrutinised during the stage of second reading. If the majority of members present and voting accept the bill, the bill is regarded as passed by the House. Thereafter, the bill is authenticated by the presiding officer of the House and transmitted to the second House for consideration and approval. A bill is deemed to have been passed by the Parliament only when both the Houses have agreed to it, either with or without amendments.

4. Bill in the Second House:
In the second House also, the bill passes through all the three stages, that is, first reading, second reading and third reading. There are four alternatives before this House:
(a) it may pass the bill as sent by the first house (ie, without amendments);
(b) it may pass the bill with amendments and return it to the first House for reconsideration;
(c) it may reject the bill altogether; and
(d) it may not take any action and thus keep the bill pending.
If the second House passes the bill without any amendments or the first House accepts the amendments suggested by the second House, the bill is deemed to have been passed by both the Houses and the same is sent to the president for his assent. On the other hand, if the first House rejects the amendments suggested by the second House or the second House rejects the bill altogether or the second House does not take any action for six months, a deadlock is deemed to have taken place. To resolve such a deadlock, the president can summon a joint sitting of the two Houses. If the majority of members present and voting in the joint sitting approves the bill, the bill is deemed to have been passed by both the Houses.

5. Assent of the President:
Every bill after being passed by both Houses of Parliament either singly or at a joint sitting, is presented to the president for his assent. There are three alternatives before the president:
(a) he may give his assent to the bill; or
(b) he may withhold his assent to the bill; or
(c) he may return the bill for reconsideration of the Houses.
If the president gives his assent to the bill, the bill becomes an act and is placed on the Statute Book. If the President withholds his assent to the bill, it ends and does not become an act. If the President returns the bill for reconsideration and if it is passed by both the Houses again with or without amendments and presented to the President for his assent, the president must give his assent to the bill. Thus, the President enjoys only a “suspensive veto.”

Money Bills:
Article 110 of the Constitution deals with the definition of money bills. It states that a bill is deemed to be a money bill if it contains ‘only’ provisions dealing with all or any of the following matters:
1. The imposition, abolition, remission, alteration or regulation of any tax; 
2. The regulation of the borrowing of money by the Union government; 
3. The custody of the Consolidated Fund of India or the contingency fund of India, the payment of moneys into or the withdrawal of money from any such fund; 
4. The appropriation of money out of the Consolidated Fund of India; 
5. Declaration of any expenditure charged on the Consolidated Fund of India or increasing the amount of any such expenditure; 
6. The receipt of money on account of the Consolidated Fund of India or the public account of India or the custody or issue of such money, or the audit of the accounts of the Union or of a state; or 
7. Any matter incidental to any of the matters specified above. However, a bill is not to be deemed to be a money bill by reason only that it provides for:
1. the imposition of fines or other pecuniary penalties, or
2. the demand or payment of fees for licenses or fees for services rendered; or
3. the imposition, abolition, remission, alteration or regulation of any tax by any local authority or body for local purposes.

If any question arises whether a bill is a money bill or not, the decision of the Speaker of the Lok Sabha is final. His decision in this regard cannot be questioned in any court of law or in the either House of Parliament or even the president. When a money bill is transmitted to the Rajya Sabha for recommendation and presented to the president for assent, the Speaker endorses it as a money bill.
The Constitution lays down a special procedure for the passing of money bills in the Parliament. A money bill can only be introduced in the Lok Sabha and that too on the recommendation of the president. Every such bill is considered to be a government bill and can be introduced only by a minister.
After a money bill is passed by the Lok Sabha, it is transmitted to the Rajya Sabha for its consideration. The Rajya Sabha has restricted powers with regard to a money bill. It cannot reject or amend a money bill. It can only make the recommendations. It must return the bill to the Lok Sabha within 14 days, whether with or without recommendations. The Lok Sabha can either accept or reject all or any of the recommendations of the Rajya Sabha.
If the Lok Sabha accepts any recommendation, the bill is then deemed to have been passed by both the Houses in the modified form. If the Lok Sabha does not accept any recommendation, the bill is then deemed to have passed by both the Houses in the form originally passed by the Lok Sabha without any change.
If the Rajya Sabha does not return the bill to the Lok Sabha within 14 days, the bill is deemed to have been passed by both the Houses in the form originally passed by the Lok Sabha. Thus, the Lok Sabha has more powers than Rajya Sabha with regard to a money bill. On the other hand, both the Houses have equal powers with regard to an ordinary bill.
Finally, when a money bill is presented to the president, he may either give his assent to the bill or withhold his assent to the bill but cannot return the bill for reconsideration of the Houses. Normally, the president gives his assent to a money bill as it is introduced in the Parliament with his prior permission.

Financial Bills:
Financial bills are those bills that deal with fiscal matters, that is, revenue or expenditure. However, the Constitution uses the term ‘financial bill’ in a technical sense. Financial bills are of three kinds:
1. Money bills–Article 110
2. Financial bills (I)–Article 117 (1)
3. Financial bills (II)–Article 117 (3)
This classification implies that money bills are simply a species of financial bills. Hence, all money bills are financial bills but all financial bills are not money bills. Only those financial bills are money bills which contain exclusively those matters which are mentioned in Article 110 of the Constitution. These are also certified by the Speaker of Lok Sabha as money bills. The financial bills (I) and (II), on the other hand, have been dealt with in Article 117 of the Constitution.

Financial Bills (I):
A financial bill (I) is a bill that contains not only any or all the matters mentioned in Article 110, but also other matters of general legislation. For instance, a bill that contains a borrowing clause, but does not exclusively deal with borrowing. In two respects, a financial bill (I) is similar to a money bill–
(a) both of them can be introduced only in the Lok Sabha and not in the Rajya Sabha, and 
(b) both of them can be introduced only on the recommendation of the president. 
In all other respects, a financial bill (I) is governed by the same legislative procedure applicable to an ordinary bill. Hence, it can be either rejected or amended by the Rajya Sabha (except that an amendment other than for reduction or abolition of a tax cannot be moved in either House without the recommendation of the president i.e., the recommendation of president is not required for moving an amendment making provision for the reduction or aboli-sition of a tax). 
In case of a disagreement between the two Houses over such a bill, the president can summon a joint sitting of the two Houses to resolve the deadlock. When the bill is presented to the President, he can either give his assent to the bill or withhold his assent to the bill or return the bill for reconsideration of the Houses.

Financial Bills (II):
A financial bill (II) contains provisions involving expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India, but does not include any of the matters mentioned in Article 110. It is treated as an ordinary bill and in all respects, it is governed by the same legislative procedure which is applicable to an ordinary bill. The only special feature of this bill is that it cannot be passed by either House of Parliament unless the President has recommended to that House the consideration of the bill. Hence, financial bill (II) can be introduced in either House of Parliament and recommendation of the President is not necessary for its introduction. 
In other words, the recommendation of the President is not required at the introduction stage but is required at the consideration stage. It can be either rejected or amended by either House of Parliament. In case of a disagreement between the two Houses over such a bill, the President can summon a joint sitting of the two Houses to resolve the deadlock. When the bill is presented to the President, he can either give his assent to the bill or withhold his assent to the bill or return the bill for reconsideration of the Houses.

JOINT SITTING OF TWO HOUSES:
Joint sitting is an extraordinary machinery provided by the Constitution to resolve a deadlock between the two Houses over the passage of a bill. A deadlock is deemed to have taken place under any one of the following three situations after a bill has been passed by one House and transmitted to the other House:
1. if the bill is rejected by the other House;
2. if the Houses have finally disagreed as to the amendments to be made in the bill; or
3. if more than six months have elapsed from the date of the receipt of the bill by the other House without the bill being passed by it.
In the above three situations, the president can summon both the Houses to meet in a joint sitting for the purpose of deliberating and voting on the bill. It must be noted here that the provision of joint sitting is applicable to ordinary bills or financial bills only and not to money bills or Constitutional amendment bills. In the case of a money bill, the Lok Sabha has overriding powers, while a Constitutional amendment bill must be passed by each House separately.
In reckoning the period of six months, no account can be taken of any period during which the other House (to which the bill has been sent) is prorogued or adjourned for more than four consecutive days.
If the bill (under dispute) has already lapsed due to the dissolution of the Lok Sabha, no joint sitting can be summoned. But, the joint sitting can be held if the Lok Sabha is dissolved after the President has notified his intention to summon such a sitting (as the bill does not lapse in this case). After the President notifies his intention to summon a joint sitting of the two Houses, none of the Houses can proceed further with the bill.

The Speaker of Lok Sabha presides over a joint sitting of the two Houses and the Deputy Speaker, in his absence. If the Deputy Speaker is also absent from a joint sitting, the Deputy Chairman of Rajya Sabha presides. If he is also absent, such other person as may be determined by the members present at the joint sitting, presides over the meeting. It is clear that the Chairman of Rajya Sabha does not preside over a joint sitting as he is not a member of either House of Parliament.
The quorum to constitute a joint sitting is one-tenth of the total number of members of the two Houses. The joint sitting is governed by the Rules of Procedure of Lok Sabha and not of Rajya Sabha.
If the bill in dispute is passed by a majority of the total number of members of both the Houses present and voting in the joint sitting, the bill is deemed to have been passed by both the Houses. Normally, the Lok Sabha with greater number wins the battle in a joint sitting.

The Constitution has specified that at a joint sitting, new amendments to the bill cannot be proposed except in two cases:
1. those amendments that have caused final disagreement between the Houses; and
2. those amendments that might have become necessary due to the delay in the passage of the bill.

Since 1950, the provision regarding the joint sitting of the two Houses has been invoked only thrice. The bills that have been passed at joint sittings are:
1. Dowry Prohibition Bill, 1960.20
2. Banking Service Commission (Repeal) Bill, 1977.21
3. Prevention of Terrorism Bill, 2002.22

BUDGET IN PARLIAMENT:
The Constitution refers to the budget as the ‘annual financial statement’. In other words, the term ‘budget’ has nowhere been used in the Constitution. It is the popular name for the ‘annual financial statement’ that has been dealt with in Article 112 of the Constitution.
The budget is a statement of the estimated receipts and expenditure of the Government of India in a financial year, which begins on 1 April and ends on 31 March of the following year. In addition to the estimates of receipts and expenditure, the budget contains certain other elements. Overall, the budget contains the following:
1. Estimates of revenue and capital receipts;
2. Ways and means to raise the revenue;
3. Estimates of expenditure;
4. Details of the actual receipts and expenditure of the closing financial year and the reasons for any deficit or surplus in that year; and
5. Economic and financial policy of the coming year, that is, taxation proposals, prospects of revenue, spending programme and introduction of new schemes/projects.

Till 2017, the Government of India had two budgets, namely, the Railway Budget and the General Budget. While the former consisted of the estimates of receipts and expenditures of only the Ministry of Railways, the latter consisted of the estimates of receipts and expenditure of all the ministries of the Government of India (except the railways).
The Railway Budget was separated from the General Budget in 1924 on the recommendations of the Acworth Committee Report (1921). The reasons or objectives of this separation were as follows:
1. To introduce flexibility in railway finance.
2. To facilitate a business approach to the railway policy.
3. To secure stability of the general revenues by providing an assured annual contribution from railway revenues.
4. To enable the railways to keep their profits for their own development (after paying a fixed annual contribution to the general revenues).
In 2017, the Central Government merged the railway budget into the general budget. Hence, there is now only one budget for the Government of India i.e., Union Budget.

Constitutional Provisions:
The Constitution of India contains the following provisions with regard to the enactment of budget:
1. The President shall in respect of every financial year cause to be laid before both the Houses of Parliament a statement of estimated receipts and expenditure of the Government of India for that year. 
2. No demand for a grant shall be made except on the recommendation of the President. 
3. No money shall be withdrawn from the Consolidated Fund of India except under appropriation made by law. 
4. No money bill imposing tax shall be introduced in the Parliament except on the recommendation of the President, and such a bill shall not be introduced in the Rajya Sabha. 
5. No tax shall be levied or collected except by authority of law. 
6. Parliament can reduce or abolish a tax but cannot increase it. 
7. The Constitution has also defined the relative roles or position of both the Houses of Parliament with regard to the enactment of the budget in the following way:
(a) A money bill or finance bill dealing with taxation cannot be introduced in the Rajya Sabha–it must be introduced only in the Lok Sabha. 
(b) The Rajya Sabha has no power to vote on the demand for grants; it is the exclusive privilege of the Lok Sabha. 
(c) The Rajya Sabha should return the Money bill (or Finance bill) to the Lok Sabha within fourteen days. The Lok Sabha can either accept or reject the recommendations made by Rajya Sabha in this regard.
8. The estimates of expenditure embodied in the budget shall show separately the expenditure charged on the Consolidated Fund of India and the expenditure made from the Consolidated Fund of India. 
9. The budget shall distinguish expenditure on revenue account from other expenditure. 
10. The expenditure charged on the Consolidated Fund of India shall not be submitted to the vote of Parliament. However, it can be discussed by the Parliament.

Charged Expenditure:
The budget consists of two types of expen-diture–the expenditure ‘charged’ upon the Consolidated Fund of India and the expenditure ‘made’ from the Consolidated Fund of India. The charged expenditure is non-votable by the Parliament, that is, it can only be discussed by the Parliament, while the other type has to be voted by the Parliament. The list of the charged expenditure is as follows:
1. Emoluments and allowances of the President and other expenditure relating to his office. 
2. Salaries and allowances of the Chairman and the Deputy Chairman of the Rajya Sabha and the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker of the Lok Sabha. 
3. Salaries, allowances and pensions of the judges of the Supreme Court. 
4. Pensions of the judges of high courts. 
5. Salary, allowances and pension of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India. 
6. Salaries, allowances and pension of the chairman and members of the Union Public Service Commission. 
7. Administrative expenses of the Supreme Court, the office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India and the Union Public Service Commission including the salaries, allowances and pensions of the persons serving in these offices. 
8. The debt charges for which the Government of India is liable, including interest, sinking fund charges and redemption charges and other expenditure relating to the raising of loans and the service and redemption of debt. 
9. Any sum required to satisfy any judgement, decree or award of any court or arbitral tribunal. 
10. Any other expenditure declared by the Parliament to be so charged.

Stages in Enactment:
The budget goes through the following six stages in the Parliament:
1. Presentation of budget.
2. General discussion.
3. Scrutiny by departmental committees.
4. Voting on demands for grants.
5. Passing of appropriation bill.
6. Passing of finance bill.

1. Presentation of Budget:
Conventionally, the budget is presented to the Lok Sabha by the finance minister on the last working day of February. Since 2017, the presentation of the budget has been advanced to 1st of February.
The Budget can also be presented to the House in two or more parts and when such presentation takes place, each part shall be dealt with as if it were the budget. Further, there shall be no discussion of the budget on the day on which it is presented to the House.
The finance minister presents the budget with a speech known as the ‘budget speech’. At the end of the speech in the Lok Sabha, the budget is laid before the Rajya Sabha, which can only discuss it and has no power to vote on the demands for grants. The budget documents presented to the Parliament comprise of the following :
(i) Budget Speech
(ii) Annual Financial Statement
(iii) Demands for Grants
(iv) Appropriation Bill
(v) Finance Bill
(vi) Statements mandated under the FRBM Act:
(a) Macro-Economic Framework Statement
(b) Fiscal Policy Strategy Statement
(c) Medium Term Fiscal Policy Statement
(vii) Expenditure Budget
(viii) Receipts Budget
(ix) Expenditure Profile
(x) Memorandum Explaining the Provisions in the Finance Bill
(xi) Budget at a Glance
(xii) Outcome Budget
Earlier, the Economic Survey also used to be presented to the Parliament along with the budget. Now, it is presented one day or a few days before the presentation of the budget. This report is prepared by the finance ministry and indicates the status of the national economy.

2. General Discussion:
The general discussion on budget begins a few days after its presentation. It takes place in both the Houses of Parliament and lasts usually for three to four days.
During this stage, the Lok Sabha can discuss the budget as a whole or on any question of principle involved therein but no cut motion can be moved nor can the budget be submitted to the vote of the House. The finance minister has a general right of reply at the end of the discussion.

3. Scrutiny by Departmental Committees
After the general discussion on the budget is over, the Houses are adjourned for about three to four weeks. During this gap period, the 24 departmental standing committees of Parliament examine and discuss in detail the demands for grants of the concerned ministers and prepare reports on them. These reports are submitted to both the Houses of Parliament for consideration. The standing committee system established in 1993 (and expanded in 2004) makes parliamentary financial control over ministries much more detailed, close, in-depth and comprehensive.

4. Voting on Demands for Grants
In the light of the reports of the departmental standing committees, the Lok Sabha takes up voting of demands for grants. The demands are presented ministrywise. A demand becomes a grant after it has been duly voted.
Two points should be noted in this context. One, the voting of demands for grants is the exclusive privilege of the Lok Sabha, that is, the Rajya Sabha has no power of voting the demands. Second, the voting is confined to the votable part of the budget– the expenditure charged on the Consolidated Fund of India is not submitted to the vote (it can only be discussed).
Each demand is voted separately by the Lok Sabha. During this stage, the members of Parliament can discuss the details of the budget. They can also move motions to reduce any demand for grant. Such motions are called as ‘cut motion’, which are of three kinds:
(a) Policy Cut Motion:
It represents the disapproval of the policy underlying the demand. It states that the amount of the demand be reduced to Re 1. The members can also advocate an alternative policy.
(b) Economy Cut Motion:
It represents the economy that can be affected in the proposed expenditure. It states that the amount of the demand be reduced by a specified amount (which may be either a lumpsum reduction in the demand or ommission or reduction of an item in the demand).
(c) Token Cut Motion:
It ventilates a specific grievance that is within the sphere of responsibility of the Government of India. It states that the amount of the demand be reduced by Rs. 100. A cut motion, to be admissible, must satisfy the following conditions:
(i) It should relate to one demand only.
(ii) It should be clearly expressed and should not contain arguments or defamatory statements.
(iii) It should be confined to one specific matter.
(iv) It should not make suggestions for the amendment or repeal of existing laws.
(v) It should not refer to a matter that is not primarily the concern of Union government.
(vi) It should not relate to the expenditure charged on the Consolidated Fund of India.
(vii) It should not relate to a matter that is under adjudication by a court.
(viii) It should not raise a question of privilege.
(ix) It should not revive discussion on a matter on which a decision has been taken in the same session.
(x) It should not relate to a trivial matter.
(xi) It should not reflect on the character or conduct of any person whose conduct can only be challenged on a substantive motion.
(xii) It should not anticipate a matter which has been previously appointed for consideration in the same session.
(xiii) It should not seek to raise a discussion on a matter pending before any statutory tribunal or statutory authority performing judicial or quasi-judicial functions or any commission or court of enquiry.

The significance of a cut motion lies in: 
(a) facilitating the initiation of concentrated discussion on a specific demand for grant; and 
(b) upholding the principle of responsible government by probing the activities of the government. 
However, the cut motion do not have much utility in practice. They are only moved and discussed in the House but not passed as the government enjoys majority support. Their passage by the Lok Sabha amounts to the expressions of want of parliamentary confidence in the government and may lead to its resignation.
On the last day of the days allotted for discussion and voting on the demands for grants, the Speaker puts all the remaining demands to vote and disposes them whether they have been discussed by the members or not. This is known as ‘guillotine’.

5. Passing of Appropriation Bill:
The Constitution states that ‘no money shall be withdrawn from the Consolidated Fund of India except under appropriation made by law’. Accordingly, an appropriation bill is introduced to provide for the appropriation, out of the Consolidated Fund of India, all money required to meet:
(a) The grants voted by the Lok Sabha.
(b) The expenditure charged on the Consolidated Fund of India.
No such amendment can be proposed to the appropriation bill in either house of the Parliament that will have the effect of varying the amount or altering the destination of any grant voted, or of varying the amount of any expenditure charged on the Consolidated Fund of India.
The Appropriation Bill becomes the Appropriation Act after it is assented to by the President. This act authorises (or legalises) the payments from the Consolidated Fund of India. This means that the government cannot withdraw money from the Consolidated Fund of India till the enactment of the appropriation bill. This takes time and usually goes on till the end of April. But the government needs money to carry on its normal activities after 31 March (the end of the financial year). To overcome this functional difficulty, the Constitution has authorised the Lok Sabha to make any grant in advance in respect to the estimated expenditure for a part of the financial year, pending the completion of the voting of the demands for grants and the enactment of the appropriation bill. This provision is known as the ‘vote on account’. It is passed (or granted) after the general discussion on budget is over. It is generally granted for two months for an amount equivalent to onesixth of the total estimation.

6. Passing of Finance Bill:
The Finance Bill is introduced to give effect to the financial proposals of the Government of India for the following year. It is subjected to all the conditions applicable to a Money Bill. Unlike the Appropriation Bill, the amendments (seeking to reject or reduce a tax) can be moved in the case of finance bill. According to the Provisional Collection of Taxes Act of 1931, the Finance Bill must be enacted (i.e., passed by the Parliament and assented to by the president) within 75 days. The Finance Act legalises the income side of the budget and completes the process of the enactment of the budget.

Other Grants:
In addition to the budget that contains the ordinary estimates of income and expenditure for one financial year, various other grants are made by the Parliament under extraordinary or special circumstances:

Supplementary Grant:
It is granted when the amount authorised by the Parliament through the appropriation act for a particular service for the current financial year is found to be insufficient for that year.

Additional Grant:
It is granted when a need has arisen during the current financial year for additional expenditure upon some new service not contemplated in the budget for that year.

Excess Grant:
It is granted when money has been spent on any service during a financial year in excess of the amount granted for that service in the budget for that year. It is voted by the Lok Sabha after the financial year. Before the demands for excess grants are submitted to the Lok Sabha for voting, they must be approved by the Public Accounts Committee of Parliament.

Vote of Credit:
It is granted for meeting an unexpected demand upon the resources of India, when on account of the magnitude or the indefinite character of the service, the demand cannot be stated with the details ordinarily given in a budget. Hence, it is like a blank cheque given to the Executive by the Lok Sabha.

Exceptional Grant:
It is granted for a special purpose and forms no part of the current service of any financial year.

Token Grant:
It is granted when funds to meet the proposed expenditure on a new service can be made available by reappropriation. A demand for the grant of a token sum (of Re 1) is submitted to the vote of the Lok Sabha and if assented, funds are made available. Reappropriation involves transfer of funds from one head to another. It does not involve any additional expenditure.
Supplementary, additional, excess and exceptional grants and vote of credit are regulated by the same procedure which is applicable in the case of a regular budget.

Funds:
The Constitution of India provides for the following three kinds of funds for the Central government:
1. Consolidated Fund of India (Article 266)
2. Public Account of India (Article 266)
3. Contingency Fund of India (Article 267)

Consolidated Fund of India:
It is a fund to which all receipts are credited and all payments are debited. In other words, 
(a) all revenues received by the Government of India; 
(b) all loans raised by the Government by the issue of treasury bills, loans or ways and means of advances; and 
(c) all money received by the government in repayment of loans forms the Consolidated Fund of India.
 All the legally authorised payments on behalf of the Government of India are made out of this fund. No money out of this fund can be appropriated (issued or drawn) except in accordance with a parliamentary law.

Public Account of India:
All other public money (other than those which are credited to the Consolidated Fund of India) received by or on behalf of the Government of India shall be credited to the Public Account of India. This includes provident fund deposits, judicial deposits, savings bank deposits, departmental deposits, remittances and so on. This account is operated by executive action, that is, the payments from this account can by made without parliamentary appropriation. Such payments are mostly in the nature of banking transactions.

Contingency Fund of India:
The Constitution authorised the Parliament to establish a ‘Contingency Fund of India’, into which amounts determined by law are paid from time to time. Accordingly, the Parliament enacted the contingency fund of India Act in 1950. This fund is placed at the disposal of the president, and he can make advances out of it to meet unforeseen expenditure pending its authorisation by the Parliament. The fund is held by the finance secretary on behalf of the president. Like the public account of India, it is also operated by executive action.

MULTIFUNCTIONAL ROLE OF PARLIAMENT:
In the ‘Indian politico-administrative system’, the Parliament occupies a central position and has a multifunctional role. It enjoys extensive powers and performs a variety of functions towards the fulfilment of its constitutionally expected role. Its powers and functions can be classified under the following heads:
1. Legislative Powers and Functions
2. Executive Powers and Functions
3. Financial Powers and Functions
4. Constituent Powers and Functions
5. Judicial Powers and Functions
6. Electoral Powers and Functions
7. Other powers and functions.

1. Legislative Powers and Functions:
The primary function of Parliament is to make laws for the governance of the country. It has exclusive power to make laws on the subjects enumerated in the Union List (which at present has 98 subjects, originally 97 subjects) and on the residuary subjects (that is, subjects not enumerated in any of the three lists). With regard to Concurrent List (which has at present 52 subjects, originally 47 subjects), the Parliament has overriding powers, that is, the law of Parliament prevails over the law of the state legislature in case of a conflict between the two.
The Constitution also empowers the Parliament to make laws on the subjects enumerated in the State List (which at present has 59 subjects, originally 66 subjects) under the following five abnormal circumstances:
(a) when Rajya Sabha passes a resolution to that effect.
(b) when a proclamation of National Emergency is in operation.
(c) when two or more states make a joint request to the Parliament.
(d) when necessary to give effect to international agreements, treaties and conventions.
(e) when President’s Rule is in operation in the state.
All the ordinances issued by the president (during the recess of the Parliament) must be approved by the Parliament within six weeks after its reassembly. An ordinance becomes inoperative if it is not approved by the parliament within that period. The Parliament makes laws in a skeleton form and authorises the Executive to make detailed rules and regulations within the framework of the parent law. This is known as delegated legislation or executive legislation or subordinate legislation. Such rules and regulations are placed before the Parliament for its examination.

2. Executive Powers and Functions:
The Constitution of India established a parliamentary form of government in which the Executive is responsible to the Parliament for its policies and acts. Hence, the Parliament exercises control over the Executive through question-hour, zero hour, half-an-hour discussion, short duration discussion, calling attention motion, adjournment motion, no-confidence motion, censure motion and other discussions. It also supervises the activities of the Executive with the help of its committees like committee on government assurance, committee on subordinate legislation, committee on petitions, etc.
The ministers are collectively responsible to the Parliament in general and to the Lok Sabha in particular. As a part of collective responsibility, there is individual responsibility, that is, each minister is individually responsible for the efficient administration of the ministry under his charge. This means that they continue in office so long as they enjoy the confidence of the majority members in the Lok Sabha. In other words, the council of ministers can be removed from office by the Lok Sabha by passing a noconfidence motion. The Lok Sabha can also express lack of confidence in the government in the following ways:
(a) By not passing a motion of thanks on the President’s inaugural address.
(b) By rejecting a money bill.
(c) By passing a censure motion or an adjournment motion.
(d) By defeating the government on a vital issue.
(e) By passing a cut motion.
Therefore, “the first function of Parliament can be said to be to select the group which is to form the government, support and sustain it in power so long as it enjoys its confidence, and to expel it when it ceases to do so, and leave it to the people to decide at the next general election.”

3. Financial Powers and Functions:
No tax can be levied or collected and no expenditure can be incurred by the Executive except under the authority and with the approval of Parliament. Hence, the budget is placed before the Parliament for its approval. The enactment of the budget by the Parliament legalises the receipts and expenditure of the government for the ensuing financial year.
The Parliament also scrutinises government spending and financial performance with the help of its financial committees. These include public accounts committee, estimates committee and committee on public undertakings. They bring out the cases of illegal, irregular, unauthorised, improper usage and wastage and extravagance in public expenditure.
Therefore, the parliamentary control over the Executive in financial matters operates in two stages:
(a) budgetary control, that is, control before the appropriation of grants through the enactment of the budget; and
(b) post-budgetary control, that is, control after the appropriation of grants through the three financial committees.
The budget is based on the principle of annuity, that is, the Parliament grants money to the government for one financial year. If the granted money is not spent by the end of the financial year, then the balance expires and returns to the Consolidated Fund of India. This practice is known as the ‘rule of lapse’. It facilitates effective financial control by the Parliament as no reserve funds can be built without its authorisation. However, the observance of this rule leads to heavy rush of expenditure towards the close of the financial year. This is popularly called as ‘March Rush’.

4. Constituent Powers and Functions:
The Parliament is vested with the powers to amend the Constitution by way of addition, variation or repeal of any provision. The major part of the Constitution can be amended by the Parliament with special majority, that is, a majority of the total membership of each House and a majority of not less than twothirds of the members present and voting in each House. Some other provisions of the Constitution can be amended by the Parliament with simple majority, that is, a majority of the members present and voting in each House of Parliament. Only a few provisions of the Constitution can be amended by the Parliament (by special majority) and with the consent of at least half of the state Legislatures (by simple majority). 
However, the power to initiate the process of the amendment of the Constitution (in all the three cases) lies exclusively in the hands of the Parliament and not the state legislature. There is only one exception, that is, the state legislature can pass a resolution requesting the Parliament for the creation or abolition of the legislative council in the state. Based on the resolution, the Parliament makes an act for amending the Constitution to that effect. To sum up, the Parliament can amend the Constitution in three ways:
(a) By simple majority;
(b) By special majority; and
(c) By special majority but with the consent of half of all the state legislatures.
The constituent power of the Parliament is not unlimited; it is subject to the ‘basic structure’ of the Constitution. In others words, the Parliament can amend any provision of the Constitution except the ‘basic features’ of the Constitution. This was ruled by the Supreme Court in the Kesavananda Bharati case (1973) and reaffirmed in the Minerva Mills case (1980).

5. Judicial Powers and Functions:
The judicial powers and functions of the Parliament include the following:
(a) It can impeach the President for the violation of the Constitution.
(b) It can remove the Vice-President from his office.
(c) It can recommend the removal of judges (including chief justice) of the Supreme Court and the high courts, chief election commissioner, comptroller and auditor general to the president.
(d) It can punish its members or outsiders for the breach of its privileges or its contempt.

6. Electoral Powers and Functions:
The Parliament participates in the election of the President (along with the state legislative assemblies) and elects the VicePresident. The Lok Sabha elects its Speaker and Deputy Speaker, while the Rajya Sabha elects its Deputy Chairman.
The Parliament is also authorised to make laws to regulate the elections to the offices of President and Vice-President, to both the Houses of Parliament and to both the Houses of state legislature. Accordingly, Parliament enacted the Presidential and Vice-Presidential Election Act (1952), the Representation of People Act (1950), the Representation of People Act (1951), etc.

7. Other Powers and Functions:
The various other powers and functions of the Parliament include:
(a) It serves as the highest deliberative body in the country. It discusses various issues of national and international significance.
(b) It approves all the three types of emergencies (national, state and financial) proclaimed by the President.
(c) It can create or abolish the state legislative councils on the recommendation of the concerned state legislative assemblies.
(d) It can increase or decrease the area, alter the boundaries and change the names of states of the Indian Union.
(e) It can regulate the organisation and jurisdiction of the Supreme Court and high courts and can establish a common high court for two or more states.

INEFFECTIVENESS OF PARLIAMENTARY CONTROL:
The parliamentary control over government and administration in India is more theoretical than practical. In reality, the control is not as effective as it ought to be. The following factors are responsible for this:
(a) The Parliament has neither time nor expertise to control the administration which has grown in volume as well as complexity. 
(b) Parliament’s financial control is hindered by the technical nature of the demands for grants. The parliamentarians being laymen cannot understand them properly and fully. 
(c) The legislative leadership lies with the Executive and it plays a significant role in formulating policies. 
(d) The very size of the Parliament is too large and unmanagable to be effective. 
(e) The majority support enjoyed by the Executive in the Parliament reduces the possibility of effective criticism. 
(f) The financial committees like Public Accounts Committee examines the public expenditure after it has been incurred by the Executive. Thus, they do post mortem work. 
(g) The increased recourse to ‘guillotine’ reduced the scope of financial control.
(h) The growth of ‘delegated legislation’ has reduced the role of Parliament in making detailed laws and has increased the powers of bureaucracy. 
(i) The frequent promulgation of ordinances by the president dilutes the Parliament’s power of legislation. 
(j) The Parliament’s control is sporadic, general and mostly political in nature. 
(k) Lack of strong and steady opposition in the Parliament, and a setback in the parliamentary behaviour and ethics, have also contributed to the ineffectiveness of legislative control over administration in India.

POSITION OF RAJYA SABHA:
The Constitutional position of the Rajya Sabha (as compared with the Lok Sabha) can be studied from three angles:
1. Where Rajya Sabha is equal to Lok Sabha.
2. Where Rajya Sabha is unequal to Lok Sabha.
3. Where Rajya Sabha has special powers that are not at all shared with the Lok Sabha.

Matters in which Rajya Sabha has equal Status as Lok Sabha:
In the following matters, the powers and status of the Rajya Sabha are equal to that of the Lok Sabha:
1. Introduction and passage of ordinary bills.
2. Introduction and passage of Constitutional amendment bills.
3. Introduction and passage of financial bills involving expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India.
4. Election and impeachment of the president.
5. Election and removal of the Vice-President. However, Rajya Sabha alone can initiate the removal of the vice-president. He is removed by a resolution passed by the Rajya Sabha by an effective majority (which is a type of special majority) and agreed to by the Lok Sabha by a simple majority.
6. Making recommendation to the President for the removal of Chief Justice and judges of Supreme Court and high courts, chief election commissioner and comptroller and auditor general. 
7. Approval of ordinances issued by the President. 
8. Approval of proclamation of all three types of emergencies by the President. 
9. Selection of ministers including the Prime Minister. Under the Constitution, the ministers including the Prime Minister can be members of either House. However, irrespective of their membership, they are responsible only to the Lok Sabha. 
10. Consideration of the reports of the constitutional bodies like Finance Commission, Union Public Service Commission, comptroller and auditor general, etc. 
11. Enlargement of the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court and the Union Public Service Commission.

Matters in which Rajya Sabha has unequal Status as Lok Sabha:
In the following matters, the powers and status of the Rajya Sabha are unequal to that of the Lok Sabha:
1. A Money Bill can be introduced only in the Lok Sabha and not in the Rajya Sabha. 
2. Rajya Sabha cannot amend or reject a Money Bill. It should return the bill to the Lok Sabha within 14 days, either with recommendations or without recommendations. 
3. The Lok Sabha can either accept or reject all or any of the recommendations of the Rajya Sabha. In both the cases, the money bill is deemed to have been passed by the two Houses. 
4. A financial bill, not containing solely the matters of Article 110, also can be introduced only in the Lok Sabha and not in the Rajya Sabha. But, with regard to its passage, both the Houses have equal powers. 
5. The final power to decide whether a particular bill is a Money Bill or not is vested in the Speaker of the Lok Sabha. 
6. The Speaker of Lok Sabha presides over the joint sitting of both the Houses. 
7. The Lok Sabha with greater number wins the battle in a joint sitting except when the combined strength of the ruling party in both the Houses is less than that of the opposition parties. 
8. Rajya Sabha can only discuss the budget but cannot vote on the demands for grants (which is the exclusive privilege of the Lok Sabha). 
9. A resolution for the discontinuance of the national emergency can be passed only by the Lok Sabha and not by the Rajya Sabha. 
10. The Rajya Sabha cannot remove the council of ministers by passing a no-confidence motion. This is because the Council of ministers is collectively responsible only to the Lok Sabha. But, the Rajya Sabha can discuss and criticise the policies and activities of the government.

Special Powers of Rajya Sabha:
The Rajya Sabha has been given four exclusive or special powers that are not enjoyed by the Lok Sabha:
1. It can authorise the Parliament to make a law on a subject enumerated in the State List (Article 249). 
2. It can authorise the Parliament to create new All-India Services common to both the Centre and states (Article 312). 
3. It alone can initiate a move for the removal of the vicepresident. In other words, a resolution for the removal of the vice-president can be introduced only in the Rajya Sabha and not in the Lok Sabha (Article 67). 
4. If a proclamation is issued by the President for imposing national emergency or president’s rule or financial emergency at a time when the Lok Sabha has been dissolved or the dissolution of the Lok Sabha takes place within the period allowed for its approval, then the proclamation can remain effective even if it is approved by the Rajya Sabha alone (Articles 352, 356 and 360).
An analysis of the above points makes it clear that the position of the Rajya Sabha in our constitutional system is not as weak as that of the House of Lords in the British constitutional system nor as strong as that of the Senate in the American constitutional system. Except in financial matters and control over the council of ministers, the powers and status of the Rajya Sabha in all other spheres are broadly equal and coordinate with that of the Lok Sabha.

Even though the Rajya Sabha has been given less powers as compared with the Lok Sabha, its utility is supported on the following grounds:
1. It checks hasty, defective, careless and ill-considered legislation made by the Lok Sabha by making provision of revision and thought. 
2. It facilitates giving representation to eminent professionals and experts who cannot face the direct election. The President nominates 12 such persons to the Rajya Sabha. 
3. It maintains the federal equilibrium by protecting the interests of the states against the undue interference of the Centre.

PARLIAMENTARY PRIVILEGES:
Meaning of Parliamentary privileges:
Parliamentary privileges are special rights, immunities and exemptions enjoyed by the two Houses of Parliament, their committees and their members. They are necessary in order to secure the independence and effectiveness of their actions. Without these privileges, the Houses can neither maintain their authority, dignity and honour nor can protect their members from any obstruction in the discharge of their parliamentary responsibilities.
The Constitution has also extended the parliamentary privileges to those persons who are entitled to speak and take part in the proceedings of a House of Parliament or any of its committees. These include the attorney general of India and Union ministers. It must be clarified here that the parliamentary privileges do not extend to the president who is also an integral part of the Parliament.

Classification of Parliamentary privileges:
Parliamentary privileges can be classified into two broad categories:
1. those that are enjoyed by each House of Parliament collectively, and
2. those that are enjoyed by the members individually.

Collective Privileges:
The privileges belonging to each House of Parliament collectively are:
1. It has the right to publish its reports, debates and proceedings and also the right to prohibit others from publishing the same. The 44th Amendment Act of 1978 restored the freedom of the press to publish true reports of parliamentary proceedings without prior permission of the House. But this is not applicable in the case of a secret sitting of the House. 
2. It can exclude strangers from its proceedings and hold secret sittings to discuss some important matters. 
3. It can make rules to regulate its own procedure and the conduct of its business and to adjudicate upon such matters. 
4. It can punish members as well as outsiders for breach of its privileges or its contempt by reprimand, admonition or imprisonment (also suspension or expulsion, in case of members). 
5. It has the right to receive immediate information of the arrest, detention, conviction, imprisonment and release of a member. 
6. It can institute inquiries and order the attendance of witnesses and send for relevant papers and records. 
7. The courts are prohibited to inquire into the proceedings of a House or its committees. 
8. No person (either a member or outsider) can be arrested, and no legal process (civil or criminal) can be served within the precincts of the House without the permission of the presiding officer.

Individual Privileges:
The privileges belonging to the members individually are:
1. They cannot be arrested during the session of Parliament and 40 days before the beginning and 40 days after the end of a session. This privilege is available only in civil cases and not in criminal cases or preventive detention cases. 
2. They have freedom of speech in Parliament. No member is liable to any proceedings in any court for anything said or any vote given by him in Parliament or its committees. This freedom is subject to the provisions of the Constitution and to the rules and standing orders regulating the procedure of Parliament. 
3. They are exempted from jury service. They can refuse to give evidence and appear as a witness in a case pending in a court when Parliament is in session.

Breach of Privilege and Contempt of the House:
“When any individual or authority disregards or attacks any of the privileges, rights and immunities, either of the member individually or of the House in its collective capacity, the offence is termed as breach of privilege and is punishable by the House.”
Any act or omission which obstructs a House of Parliament, its member or its officer in the performance of their functions or which has a tendency, directly or indirectly to produce results against the dignity, authority and honour of the House is treated as a contempt of the House.
Though the two phrases, ‘breach of privilege’ and ‘contempt of the House’ are used interchangeably, they have different implications. ‘Normally, a breach of privilege may amount to contempt of the House. Likewise, contempt of the House may include a breach of privilege also. Contempt of the House, however, has wider implications. There may be a contempt of the House without specifically committing a breach of privilege’.
Similarly, ‘actions which are not breaches of any specific privilege but are offences against the dignity and authority of the House amount to contempt of the House’. For example, disobedience to a legitimate order of the House is not a breach of privilege, but can be punished as contempt of the House.

Sources of Privileges:
Originally, the Constitution (Article 105) expressedly mentioned two privileges, that is, freedom of speech in Parliament and right of publication of its proceedings. With regard to other privileges, it provided that they were to be the same as those of the British House of Commons, its committees and its members on the date of its commencement (ie, 26 January, 1950), until defined by Parliament. The 44th Amendment Act of 1978 provided that the other privileges of each House of Parliament, its committees and its members are to be those which they had on the date of its commencement (ie, 20 June, 1979), until defined by Parliament.
This means that the position with regard to other privileges remains same. In other words, the amendment has made only verbal changes by dropping a direct reference to the British House of Commons, without making any change in the implication of the provision.
It should be noted here that the Parliament, till now, has not made any special law to exhaustively codify all the privileges. They are based on five sources, namely,
1. Constitutional provisions,
2. Various laws made by Parliament,
3. Rules of both the Houses,
4. Parliamentary conventions, and
5. Judicial interpretations.

SOVEREIGNTY OF PARLIAMENT:
The doctrine of ‘sovereignty of Parliament’ is associated with the British Parliament. Sovereignty means the supreme power within the State. That supreme power in Great Britain lies with the Parliament. There are no ‘legal’ restrictions on its authority and jurisdiction.
Therefore, the sovereignty of Parliament (parliamentary supremacy) is a cardinal feature of the British constitutional system. According to AV Dicey, the British jurist, this principle has three implications:
1. The Parliament can make, amend, substitute or repeal any law. De Lolme, a British political analyst, said, ‘The British Parliament can do every thing except make a woman a man and a man a woman’. 
2. The Parliament can make constitutional laws by the same procedure as ordinary laws. In other words, there is no legal distinction between the constituent authority and the legislative authority of the British Parliament. 
3. The Parliamentary laws cannot be declared invalid by the Judiciary as being unconstitutional. In other words, there is no system of judicial review in Britain.

The Indian Parliament, on the other hand, cannot be regarded as a sovereign body in the similar sense as there are ‘legal’ restrictions on its authority and jurisdiction. The factors that limit the sovereignty of Indian Parliament are:
1. Written Nature of the Constitution:
The Constitution is the fundamental law of the land in our country. It has defined the authority and jurisdiction of all the three organs of the Union government and the nature of interrelationship between them. Hence, the Parliament has to operate within the limits prescribed by the Constitution. There is also a legal distinction between the legislative authority and the constituent authority of the Parliament. Moreover, to effect certain amendments to the Constitution, the ratification of half of the states is also required. In Britain, on the other hand, the Constitution is neither written nor there is anything like a fundamental law of the land.

2. Federal System of Government:
India has a federal system of government with a constitutional division of powers between the Union and the states. Both have to operate within the spheres allotted to them. Hence, the lawmaking authority of the Parliament gets confined to the subjects enumerated in the Union List and Concurrent List and does not extend to the subjects enumerated in the State List (except in five abnormal circumstances and that too for a short period). Britain, on the other hand, has a unitary system of government and hence, all the powers are vested in the Centre.

3. System of Judicial Review:
The adoption of an independent Judiciary with the power of judicial review also restricts the supremacy of our Parliament. Both the Supreme Court and high courts can declare the laws enacted by the Parliament as void and ultra vires (unconstitutional), if they contravene any provision of the Constitution. On the other hand, there is no system of judicial review in Britain. The British Courts have to apply the Parliamentary laws to specific cases, without examining their constitutionality, legality or reasonableness.

4. Fundamental Rights:
The authority of the Parliament is also restricted by the incorporation of a code of justiciable fundamental rights under Part III of the Constitution. Article 13 prohibits the State from making a law that either takes away totally or abrogates in part a fundamental right. Hence, a Parliamentary law that contravenes the fundamental rights shall be void. In Britain, on the other hand, there is no codification of justiciable fundamental rights in the Constitution. The British Parliament has also not made any law that lays down the fundamental rights of the citizens. However, it does not mean that the British citizens do not have rights. Though there is no charter guaranteeing rights, there is maximum liberty in Britain due to the existence of the Rule of Law.
Therefore, even though the nomenclature and organisational pattern of our Parliament is similar to that of the British Parliament, there is a substantial difference between the two. The Indian Parliament is not a sovereign body in the sense in which the British Parliament is a sovereign body. Unlike the British Parliament, the authority and jurisdiction of the Indian Parliament are defined, limited and restrained.
In this regard, the Indian Parliament is similar to the American Legislature (known as Congress). In USA also, the sovereignty of Congress is legally restricted by the written character of the Constitution, the federal system of government, the system of judicial review and the Bill of Rights.

Parliamentary Committees:
The Parliament is too unwieldy a body to deliberate effectively the issues that come up before it. The functions of the Parliament are varied, complex and voluminous. Moreover, it has neither the adequate time nor necessary expertise to make a detailed scrutiny of all legislative measures and other matters. Therefore, it is assisted by a number of committees in the discharge of its duties.
The Constitution of India makes a mention of these committees at different places, but without making any specific provisions regarding their composition, tenure, functions, etc. All these matters are dealt by the rules of two Houses. Accordingly, a parliamentary committee means a committee that:
1. Is appointed or elected by the House or nominated by the Speaker / Chairman
2. Works under the direction of the Speaker / Chairman
3. Presents its report to the House or to the Speaker / Chairman
4. Has a secretariat provided by the Lok Sabha / Rajya Sabha 
The consultative committees, which also consist of members of Parliament, are not parliamentary committees as they do not fulfill above four conditions.

Classification of Parliamentary Committees:
Broadly, parliamentary committees are of two kinds–Standing Committees and Ad Hoc Committees. The former are permanent (constituted every year or periodically) and work on a continuous basis, while the latter are temporary and cease to exist on completion of the task assigned to them.
Standing Committees:
On the basis of the nature of functions performed by them, standing committees can be classified into the following six categories:
1. Financial Committees
(a) Public Accounts Committee
(b) Estimates Committee
(c) Committee on Public Undertakings
2. Departmental Standing Committees
3. Committees to Inquire
(a) Committee on Petitions
(b) Committee of Privileges
(c) Ethics Committee
4. Committees to Scrutinise and Control
(a) Committee on Government Assurances
(b) Committee on Subordinate Legislation
(c) Committee on Papers Laid on the Table
(d) Committee on Welfare of SCs and STs
(e) Committee on Empowerment of Women
(f) Joint Committee3 on Offices of Profit
5. Committees Relating to the Day-to-Day Business of the House
(a) Business Advisory Committee
(b) Committee on Private Members’ Bills and Resolutions
(c) Rules Committee
(d) Committee on Absence of Members from Sittings of the House 6. House-Keeping Committees or Service Committees (i.e., Committees concerned with the Provision of Facilities and Services to Members):
(a) General Purposes Committee
(b) House Committee
(c) Library Committee
(d) Joint Committee on Salaries and Allowances of Members

Ad Hoc Committees:
Ad hoc committees can be divided into two categories, that is, Inquiry Committees and Advisory Committees.
1. Inquiry Committees are constituted from time to time, either by the two Houses on a motion adopted in that behalf, or by the Speaker / Chairman, to inquire into and report on specific subjects. For example:
(a) Committee on the Conduct of Certain Members during President’s Address
(b) Committee on Draft Five-Year Plan
(c) Railway Convention Committee
(d) Committee on Members of Parliament Local Area Development Scheme (MPLADS)
(e) Joint Committee on Bofors Contract
(f) Joint Committee on Fertilizer Pricing
(g) Joint Committee to Enquire into Irregularities in Securities and Banking Transactions
(h) Joint Committee on Stock Market Scam
(i) Joint Committee on Security in Parliament Complex
(j) Committee on Provision of Computers to Members of
Parliament, Offices of Political Parties and Officers of the Lok Sabha Secretariat
(k) Committee on Food Management in Parliament House Complex
(l) Committee on Installation of Portraits / Statues of National Leaders and Parliamentarians in Parliament House Complex
(m) Joint Committee on Maintenance of Heritage Character and Development of Parliament House Complex
(n) Committee on Violation of Protocol Norms and Contemptuous Behaviour of Government Officers with Members of Lok Sabha
(o) Joint Committee to Examine Matters Relating to Allocation and Pricing of Telecom Licences and Spectrum

2. Advisory Committees include select or joint committees on bills, which are appointed to consider and report on particular bills. These committees are distinguishable from the other ad hoc committees in as much as they are concerned with bills and the procedure to be followed by them is laid down in the Rules of Procedure and the Directions by the Speaker / Chairman.
When a Bill comes up before a House for general discussion, it is open to that House to refer it to a Select Committee of the House or a Joint Committee of the two Houses. A motion to this effect has to be moved and adopted in the House in which the Bill comes up for consideration. In case the motion adopted is for reference of the Bill to a Joint Committee, the decision is conveyed to the other House, requesting the members to nominate members of the other House to serve on the Committee.
The Select or Joint Committee considers the Bill clause by clause just as the two Houses do. Amendments to various clauses can be moved by members of the Committee. The Committee can also take evidence of associations, public bodies or experts who are interested in the Bill. After the Bill has thus been considered, the Committee submits its report to the House. Members who do not agree with the majority report may append their minutes of dissent to the report.

FINANCIAL COMMITTEES:
Public Accounts Committee:
This committee was set up first in 1921 under the provisions of the Government of India Act of 1919 and has since been in existence. At present, it consists of 22 members (15 from the Lok Sabha and  from the Rajya Sabha). The members are elected by the Parliament every year from amongst its members according to the principle of proportional representation by means of the single transferable vote. Thus, all parties get due representation in it. The term of office of the members is one year. A minister cannot be elected as a member of the committee. The chairman of the committee is appointed from amongst its members by the Speaker. Until 1966 - ‘67, the chairman of the committee belonged to the ruling party. However, since 1967 a convention has developed whereby the chairman of the committee is selected invariably from the Opposition.
The function of the committee is to examine the annual audit reports of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India (CAG), which are laid before the Parliament by the President. The CAG submits three audit reports to the President, namely, audit report on appropriation accounts, audit report on finance accounts and audit report on public undertakings.
The committee examines public expenditure not only from legal and formal point of view to discover technical irregularities but also from the point of view of economy, prudence, wisdom and propriety to bring out the cases of waste, loss, corruption, extravagance, inefficiency and nugatory expenses. In more detail, the functions of the committee are:
1. To examine the appropriation accounts and the finance accounts of the Union government and any other accounts laid before the Lok Sabha. The appropriation accounts compare the actual expenditure with the expenditure sanctioned by the Parliament through the Appropriation Act, while the finance accounts shows the annual receipts and disbursements of the Union Government.
2. In scrutinising the appropriation accounts and the audit report of CAG on it, the committee has to satisfy itself that
(a) The money that has been disbursed was legally available for the applied service or purpose
(b) The expenditure conforms to the authority that governs it
(c) Every re-appropriation has been made in accordance with the related rules
3. To examine the accounts of state corporations, trading concerns and manufacturing projects and the audit report of CAG on them (except those public undertakings which are allotted to the Committee on Public Undertakings) 
4. To examine the accounts of autonomous and semiautonomous bodies, the audit of which is conducted by the CAG
5. To consider the report of the CAG relating to the audit of any receipt or to examine the accounts of stores and stocks
6. To examine the money spent on any service during a financial year in excess of the amount granted by the Lok Sabha for that purpose
In the fulfillment of the above functions, the committee is assisted by the CAG. In fact, the CAG acts as a guide, friend and philosopher of the committee.

On the role played by the committee, Ashok Chanda (who himself has been a CAG of India) observed: “Over a period of years, the committee has entirely fulfilled the expectation that it should develop into a powerful force in the control of public expenditure. It may be claimed that the traditions established and conventions developed by the Public Accounts Committee conform to the highest traditions of a parliamentary democracy.” However, the effectiveness of the role of the committee is limited by the following:
(a) It is not concerned with the questions of policy in broader sense. 
(b) It conducts a post-mortem examination of accounts (showing the expenditure already incurred). 
(c) It cannot intervene in the matters of day-to-day administration. 
(d) Its recommendations are advisory and not binding on the ministries. 
(e) It is not vested with the power of disallowance of expenditures by the departments. 
(f) It is not an executive body and hence, cannot issue an order. Only the Parliament can take a final decision on its findings.

Estimates Committee:
The origin of this committee can be traced to the standing financial committee set up in 1921. The first Estimates Committee in the post-independence era was constituted in 1950 on the recommendation of John Mathai, the then finance minister. Originally, it had 25 members but in 1956 its membership was raised to 30. All the thirty members are from Lok Sabha only. The Rajya Sabha has no representation in this committee. These members are elected by the Lok Sabha every year from amongst its own members, according to the principles of proportional representation by means of a single transferable vote. Thus, all parties get due representation in it. The term of office is one year. A minister cannot be elected as a member of the committee. The chairman of the committee is appointed by the Speaker from amongst its members and he is invariably from the ruling party. The function of the committee is to examine the estimates included in the budget and suggest ‘economies’ in public expenditure. Hence, it has been described as a ‘continuous economy committee’.
In more detail, the functions of the committee are:
1. To report what economies, improvements in organisation, efficiency and administrative reform consistent with the policy underlying the estimates, can be affected 
2. To suggest alternative policies in order to bring about efficiency and economy in administration 
3. To examine whether the money is well laid out within the limits of the policy implied in the estimates 
4. To suggest the form in which the estimates are to be presented to Parliament
The Committee shall not exercise its functions in relation to such public undertakings as are allotted to the Committee on Public Undertakings. The Committee may continue the examination of the estimates from time to time, throughout the financial year and report to the House as its examination proceeds. It shall not be incumbent on the Committee to examine the entire estimates of any one year. The demands for grants may be finally voted despite the fact that the Committee has made no report.
However, the effectiveness of the role of the committee is limited by the following:
(a) It examines the budget estimates only after they have been voted by the Parliament, and not before that. 
(b) It cannot question the policy laid down by the Parliament. 
(c) Its recommendations are advisory and not binding on the ministries. 
(d) It examines every year only certain selected ministries and departments. Thus, by rotation, it would cover all of them over a number of years. 
(e) It lacks the expert assistance of the CAG which is available to the Public Accounts Committee. 
(f) Its work is in the nature of a postmortem.

Committee on Public Undertakings:
This committee was created in 1964 on the recommendation of the Krishna Menon Committee. Originally, it had 15 members (10 from the Lok Sabha and 5 from the Rajya Sabha). However, in 1974, its membership was raised to 22 (15 from the Lok Sabha and 7 from the Rajya Sabha). The members of this committee are elected by the Parliament every year from amongst its own members according to the principle of proportional representation by means of a single transferable vote. Thus, all parties get due representation in it. The term of office of the members is one year. A minister cannot be elected as a member of the committee. The chairman of the committee is appointed by the Speaker from amongst its members who are drawn from the Lok Sabha only. Thus, the members of the committee who are from the Rajya Sabha cannot be appointed as the chairman.
The functions of the committee are:
1. To examine the reports and accounts of public undertakings
2. To examine the reports of the Comptroller and Auditor General on public undertakings
3. To examine (in the context of autonomy and efficiency of public undertakings) whether the affairs of the public
undertakings are being managed in accordance with sound business principles and prudent commercial practices
4. To exercise such other functions vested in the public accounts committee and the estimates committee in relation to public undertakings which are allotted to it by the Speaker from time to time
The committee is not to examine and investigate any of the following:
(i) Matters of major government policy as distinct from business or commercial functions of the public undertakings 
(ii) Matters of day-to-day administration 
(iii) Matters for the consideration of which machinery is established by any special statute under which a particular public undertaking is established
Further, the effectiveness of the role of the committee is limited by the following:
(a) It cannot take up the examination of more than ten to twelve public undertakings in a year.
(b) Its work is in the nature of a post-mortem.
(c) It does not look into technical matters as its members are not technical experts.
(d) Its recommendations are advisory and not binding on the ministries.

DEPARTMENTAL STANDING COMMITTEES:
On the recommendation of the Rules Committee of the Lok Sabha, 17 Departmentally-Related Standing Committees (DRSCs) were set up in the Parliament in 1993.6 In 2004, seven more such committees were setup, thus increasing their number from 17 to 24.
The main objective of the standing committees is to secure more accountability of the Executive (i.e., the Council of Ministers) to the Parliament, particularly financial accountability. They also assist the Parliament in debating the budget more effectively.
The 24 standing committees cover under their jurisdiction all the ministries / departments of the Central Government. Each standing committee consists of 31 members (21 from Lok Sabha and 10 from Rajya Sabha). The members of the Lok Sabha are nominated by the Speaker from amongst its own members, just as the members of the Rajya Sabha are nominated by the Chairman from amongst its members.
A minister is not eligible to be nominated as a member of any of the standing committees. In case a member, after his nomination to any of the standing committees, is appointed a minister, he then ceases to be a member of the committee. 
The term of office of each standing committee is one year from the date of its constitution. Out of the 24 standing committees, 8 work under the Rajya Sabha and 16 under the Lok Sabha.

The functions of each of the standing committees are:
1. To consider the demands for grants of the concerned ministries / departments before they are discussed and voted in the Lok Sabha. Its report should not suggest anything of the nature of cut motions 
2. To examine bills pertaining to the concerned ministries / departments 
3. To consider annual reports of ministries / departments 
4. To consider national basic long-term policy documents presented to the Houses
The following limitations are imposed on the functioning of these standing committees:
(i) They should not consider the matters of day-to-day administration of the concerned ministries / departments.
(ii) They should not generally consider the matters which are considered by other parliamentary committees.
It should be noted here that the recommendations of these committees are advisory in nature and hence not binding on the Parliament.

The following procedure shall be followed by each of the standing committees in their consideration of the demands for grants, and making a report thereon to the Houses.
(a) After general discussion on the budget in the Houses is over, the Houses shall be adjourned for a fixed period.
(b) The committees shall consider the demands for grants of the concerned ministries during the aforesaid period.
(c) The committees shall make their report within the period and shall not ask for more time.
(d) The demands for grants shall be considered by the House in the light of the reports of the committees.
(e) There shall be a separate report on the demands for grants of each ministry.

The following procedure shall be followed by each of the standing committees in examining the bills and making report thereon.
(a) The committee shall consider the general principles and clauses of bills referred to it.
(b) The Committee shall consider only such bills as introduced in either of the Houses and referred to it.
(c) The Committee shall make report on bills in a given time. 

The merits of the standing committee system in the Parliament are:
(1) Their proceedings are devoid of any party bias.
(2) The procedure adopted by them is more flexible than in the Lok Sabha.
(3) The system makes parliamentary control over executive much more detailed, close, continuous, in-depth and comprehensive.
(4) The system ensures economy and efficiency in public expenditure as the ministries / departments would now be more careful in formulating their demands.
(5) They facilitate opportunities to all the members of Parliament to participate and understand the functioning of the government and contribute to it.
(6) They can avail of expert opinion or public opinion to make the reports. They are authorised to invite experts and eminent persons to testify before them and incorporate their opinions in their reports.
(7) The opposition parties and the Rajya Sabha can now play a greater role in exercising financial control over the executive.

COMMITTEES TO INQUIRE:
Committee on Petitions:
Petitions committee examines petitions on bills and on matters of general public importance. It also entertains representations from individuals and associations on matters pertaining to Union subjects. The Lok Sabha committee consists of 15 members, while the Rajya Sabha committee consists of 10 members.

Committee of Privileges:
The functions of Privileges committee are semi-judicial in nature. It examines the cases of breach of privileges of the House and its members and recommends appropriate action. The Lok Sabha committee has 15 members, while the Rajya Sabha committee has 10 members.

Ethics Committee:
Ethics committee was constituted in Rajya Sabha in 1997 and in Lok Sabha in 2000. It enforces the code of conduct of members of Parliament. It examines the cases of misconduct and recommends appropriate action. Thus, it is engaged in maintaining discipline and decorum in Parliament.

COMMITTEES TO SCRUTINISE AND CONTROL:
Committee on Government Assurances: Government Assurances committee examines the assurances, promises and undertakings given by ministers from time to time on the floor of the House and reports on the extent to which they have been carried through. In the Lok Sabha, it consists of 15 members and in the Rajya Sabha, it consists of 10 members. It was constituted in 1953.

Committee on Subordinate Legislation:
Subordinate Legislation committee examines and reports to the House whether the powers to make regulations, rules, sub-rules and bye-laws delegated by the Parliament or conferred by the Constitution to the Executive are being properly exercised by it. In both the Houses, the committee consists of 15 members. It was constituted in 1953.

Committee on Papers Laid on the Table:
Papers Laid on the Table committee was constituted in 1975. The Lok Sabha Committee has 15 members, while the Rajya Sabha Committee has 10 members. It examines all papers laid on the table of the House by ministers to see whether they comply with provisions of the Constitution, or the related Act or Rule. It does not examine statutory notifications and orders that fall under the jurisdiction of the Committee on Subordinate Legislation.

Committee on Welfare of SCs and STs:
 Welfare of SCs and STs committee consists of 30 members (20 from Lok Sabha and 10 from Rajya Sabha). Its functions are: 
(i) to consider the reports of the National Commission for the SCs and the National Commission for the STs;
(ii) to examine all matters relating to the welfare of SCs and STs, like implementation of constitutional and statutory safeguards, working of welfare programmes, etc.

Committee on Empowerment of Women:
This committee was constituted in 1997 and consists of 30 members (20 from Lok Sabha and 10 from Rajya Sabha). It considers the reports of the National Commission for Women and examines the measures taken by the Union Government to secure status, dignity and equality for women in all fields.

Joint Committee on Offices of Profit:
This committee examines the composition and character of committees and other bodies appointed by the Central, state and union territory governments and recommends whether persons holding these offices should be disqualified from being elected as members of Parliament or not. It consists of 15 members (10 from Lok Sabha and 5 from Rajya Sabha).

COMMITTEES RELATING TO THE DAY-TO-DAY BUSINESS OF THE HOUSE:
Business Advisory Committee:
Business Advisory committee regulates the programme and time table of the House. It allocates time for the transaction of legislative and other business brought before the House by the government. The Lok Sabha committee consists of 15 members including the Speaker as its chairman. In the Rajya Sabha, it has 11 members including the Chairman as its exofficio chairman.

Committee on Private Members’ Bills and Resolutions:
Private Members’ Bills and Resolutions committee classifies bills and allocates time for the discussion on bills and resolutions introduced by private members (other than ministers). This is a special committee of the Lok Sabha and consists of 15 members including the Deputy Speaker as its chairman. The Rajya Sabha does not have any such committee. The same function in the Rajya Sabha is performed by the Business Advisory Committee of that House.

Rules Committee:
Rules committee considers the matters of procedure and conduct of business in the House and recommends necessary amendments or additions to the rules of the House. The Lok Sabha committee consists of 15 members including the Speaker as its ex-officio chairman. In the Rajya Sabha, it consists of 16 members including the Chairman as its exofficio chairman. 

Committee on Absence of Members:
Absence of Members committee considers all applications from members for leave of absence from the sittings of the House, and examines the cases of members who have been absent for a period of 60 days or more without permission. It is a special committee of the Lok Sabha and consists of 15 members. There is no such committee in the Rajya Sabha and all such matters are dealt by the House itself.

HOUSE-KEEPING COMMITTEES:
General Purposes Committee:
General Purposes committee considers and advises on matters concerning affairs of the House, which do not fall within the jurisdiction of any other parliamentary committee. In each House, this committee consists of the presiding officer (Speaker / Chairman) as its exofficio chairman, Deputy Speaker (Deputy Chairman in the case of Rajya Sabha), members of panel of chairpersons (panel of vicechairpersons in the case of Rajya Sabha), chairpersons of all the departmental standing committees of the House, leaders of recognised parties and groups in the House and such other members as nominated by the presiding officer.

House Committee:
House committee deals with residential accommodation of members and other amenities like food, medical aid, etc., accorded to them in their houses and hostels in Delhi. Both the Houses have their respective House Committees. In the Lok Sabha, it consists of 12 members.

Library Committee:
Library committee considers all matters relating to library of the Parliament and assists the members in utilising the library’s services. It consists of nine members (six from Lok Sabha and three from Rajya Sabha).

Joint Committee on Salaries and Allowances of Members:
Salaries and Allowances of Members committee was constituted under the Salary, Allowances and Pension of Members of Parliament Act, 1954. It consists of 15 members (10 from Lok Sabha and 5 from Rajya Sabha). It frames rules for regulating payment of salary, allowances and pension to members of Parliament.

CONSULTATIVE COMMITTEES:
Consultative committees are attached to various ministries / departments of the Central Government. They consist of members of both the Houses of Parliament. The Minister / Minister of State in charge of the Ministry concerned acts as the chairman of the consultative committee of that ministry. These committees provide a forum for informal discussions between the ministers and the members of Parliament on policies and programmes of the government and the manner of their implementation.

These committees are constituted by the Ministry of Parliamentary Affairs. The guidelines regarding the composition, functions and procedures of these committees are formulated by this Ministry. The Ministry also makes arrangements for holding their meetings both during the session and the inter-session period of Parliament.

The membership of these committees is voluntary and is left to the choice of the members and the leaders of their parties. The maximum membership of a committee is 30 and the minimum is 10. These committees are normally constituted after the new Lok Sabha is constituted, after General Elections for the Lok Sabha. In other words, these committees shall stand dissolved upon dissolution of every Lok Sabha and shall be reconstituted upon constitution of each Lok Sabha. 
In addition, separate Informal Consultative Committees of the members of Parliament are also constituted for all the Railway Zones. Members of Parliament belonging to the area falling under a particular Railway Zone are nominated on the Informal Consultative Committee of that Railway Zone.
Unlike the Consultative Committees attached to various ministries / departments, the meetings of the Informal Consultative Committees are to be arranged during the session periods only.

Parliamentary Forums:
ESTABLISHMENT OF THE FORUMS:
The first Parliamentary Forum on Water Conservation and Management was constituted in the year 2005. Subsequently, seven more Parliamentary forums were constituted. At present, there are eight Parliamentary forums.
1. Parliamentary Forum on Water Conservation and Management (2005) 
2. Parliamentary Forum on Youth (2006) 
3. Parliamentary Forum on Children (2006) 
4. Parliamentary Forum on Population and Public Health (2006) 
5. Parliamentary Forum on Global Warming and Climate Change (2008) 
6. Parliamentary Forum on Disaster Management (2011) 
7. Parliamentary Forum on Artisans and Crafts-people (2013) 
8. Parliamentary Forum on Millennium Development Goals (2013)

OBJECTIVES OF THE FORUMS:
The objectives behind the constitution of the Parliamentary forums are:
(i) To provide a platform to the members to have interactions with the ministers concerned, experts and key officials from the nodal ministries with a view to have a focused and meaningful discussion on critical issues with a result-oriented approach for speeding up the implementation process; 
(ii) To sensitise members about the key areas of concern and also about the ground level situation and equip them with the latest information, knowledge, technical know-how and valuable inputs from experts both from the country and abroad for enabling them to raise these issues effectively on the Floor of the House and in the meetings of the Departmentally-Related Standing Committees (DRSCs); and (iii) To prepare a data-base through collection of data on critical issues from ministries concerned, reliable NGOs, newspapers, United Nations, Internet, etc. and circulation thereof to the members so that they can meaningfully participate in the discussions of the forums and seek clarifications from experts or officials from the Ministry present in the meetings.
It has been mandated that the Parliamentary Fora will not interfere with or encroach upon the jurisdiction of the Departmentally-Related Standing Committees of the Ministry/ Department concerned.

COMPOSITION OF THE FORUMS:
The Speaker of Lok Sabha is the ex-officio President of all the Forums except the Parliamentary Forum on Population and Public Health wherein the Chairman of Rajya Sabha is the ex-officio President and the Speaker is the ex-officio Co-President. The Deputy Chairman of Rajya Sabha, the Deputy Speaker of Lok Sabha, the concerned Ministers and the Chairman of Departmentally-Related Standing Committees are the ex-officio VicePresidents of the respective Forums.
Each Forum consists of not more than 31 members (excluding the President, Co-President and Vice-Presidents) out of whom not more than 21 are from the Lok Sabha and not more than 10 are from the Rajya Sabha.
Members (other than the President, Co-President and VicePresidents) of these forums are nominated by the Speaker/ Chairman from amongst the leaders of various political parties/groups or their nominees, who have special knowledge/keen interest in the subject.
The duration of the office of members of the forum is coterminus with their membership in the respective Houses. A member may also resign from the forum by writing to the Speaker/Chairman.
The President of the forum appoints a member-convener for each forum to conduct regular, approved programmes/meetings of the forum in consultation with the President. The meetings of the forums are held from time to time, as may be necessary, during Parliament sessions.

FUNCTIONS OF THE FORUMS:
Parliamentary Forum on Water Conservation and Management The functions of the forum are:
1. To identify problems relating to water and make suggestions/recommenda-tions for consideration and appropriate action by Government/organisations concerned 
2. To identify the ways of involving members of Parliament in conservation and augmentation of water resources in their respective states/constituencies 
3. To organise seminars/workshops to create awareness for conservation and efficient management of water 
4. To undertake such other related task as it may deem fit

Parliamentary Forum on Youth:
The functions of this forum are:
1. To have focused deliberations on strategies to leverage human capital in the youth for accelerating development initiatives 
2. To build greater awareness amongst public leaders and at the grass-roots level of the potential of youth for effecting socio-economic change 
3. To interact on a regular basis with youth representatives and leaders, in order to better appreciate their hopes, aspirations, concerns and problems 
4. To consider ways for improving Parliament’s out-reach to different sections of youth, in order to reinforce their faith and commitment in democratic institutions and encourage their active participation therein 
5. To hold consultations with experts, national and international academicians and government agencies concerned on redesigning of public policy in the matter of youth empowerment.

Parliamentary Forum on Children
The functions of the forum are:
1. To further enhance awareness and attention of Parliamentarians towards critical issues affecting children’s well being so that they may provide due leadership to ensure their rightful place in the development process 
2. To provide a platform to Parliamentarians to exchange ideas, views, experiences, expert practices in relation to children, in a structured manner, through workshops, seminars, orientation programmes, etc. 
3. To provide Parliamentarians an interface with civil society for highlighting children’s issues, including, inter-alia, the voluntary sector, media and corporate sector, and thereby to foster effective strategic partnerships in this regard 
4. To enable Parliamentarians to interact, in an institutionalised manner with specialised UN agencies like the UNICEF and other comparable multilateral agencies on expert reports, studies, news and trend-analyses, etc., world-wide, which are germane to developments in the sector 5. To undertake any other tasks, projects, assignments, etc., as the Forum may deem fit.

The functions of Parliamentary Forum on Population and Public Health are:
1. To have focused deliberations on strategies relating to population stabilisation and matters connected therewith 
2. To discuss and prepare strategies on issues concerning public health 
3. To build greater awareness in all sections of the society, particularly at the grassroot level, regarding population control and public health 
4. To hold comprehensive dialogue and discussion in the matter of population and public health with experts at the national and international levels and to have interactions with multilateral organisations like WHO, United Nations Population Fund, and academicians and government agencies concerned.

The functions of Parliamentary Forum on Global Warming and Climate Change are:
1. To identify problems relating to global warming and climate change and make suggestions/recommendations for consideration and appropriate action by the government/organisations concerned to reduce the extent of global warming 
2. To identify the ways of involving members of Parliament to interact with specialists of national and international bodies working on global warming and climate change with increased effort to develop new technologies to mitigate global warming 
3. To organise seminars/workshops to create awareness about the causes and effects of global warming and climate change among the members of Parliament 
4. To identify the ways of involving members of Parliament to spread awareness to prevent global warming and climate change 
5. To undertake such other related task as it may deem fit

The functions of Parliamentary Forum on Disaster Management are:
1. To identify problems relating to Disaster Management and make suggestions / recommendations for consideration and appropriate action by the Government / Organizations concerned to reduce the effects of disasters. 
2. To identify the ways of involving Members of Parliament to interact with specialists of National and International Bodies working on Disaster Management with increased effort to develop new technologies to mitigate the effect of disasters. 
3. To organize seminars / workshops to create awareness about the causes and effects of disasters among the Members of Parliament. 
4. To identify the ways of involving Members of Parliament to spread awareness about disaster management. 
5. To undertake such other related task as it may deem fit.

The functions of Parliamentary Forum on Artisans and Crafts people are:
1. To further enhance awareness and attention to Parliamentarians towards critical issues affecting artisans and craftspeople so as to preserve and promote traditional art and crafts through various mechanisms. 
2. To provide a platform to Parliamentarians to exchange ideas, views, experiences, expertise and best practices in relation to artisans and craftspeople, in a structured manner, through Workshops, Seminars, Orientation Programmes, etc. 
3. To provide Parliamentarians an interface with civil society for highlighting issues related to craftspeople and artisans, including inter alia, the Voluntary Sector, Media and Corporate Sector and thereby to foster effective strategic partnerships in this regard 
4. To enable Parliamentarians to interact, in an institutionalized manner with representatives of various Union Ministries, Government Organizations like Khadi and Village Industries Commission (KVIC), Coir Board, The Council for Advancement of People’s Action and Rural Technology (CAPART) and other related Organizations/Bodies. 
5. To hold comprehensive dialogue and discussion on the matters relating to preservation of art and traditional craft and the promotion of artisans and craftspeople with experts/Organizations at the national and international levels. 
6. To undertake any other Tasks, Projects, Assignments, etc. as the Forum may deem fit.

The functions of Parliamentary Forum on Millennium Development Goals are:
1. To review and enhance awareness and attention of Parliamentarians towards critical issues which have bearing on achievement of goals/targets set under Millennium Development Goals by 2015. 
2. To provide a platform to Parliamentarians to exchange ideas, views, experiences, expertise and best practices in relation to implementation of Millennium Development Goals in a structured manner, through Workshops, Seminars, Orientation Programmes, etc. 
3. To provide Parliamentarians an interface with civil society for highlighting issues related to Millennium Development Goals, viz. eradication of poverty; hunger; achievement of universal primary education; promotion of gender equality and empowerment of women; reduction of child mortality; improving maternal health; combating HIV/ AIDS; Malaria and other diseases; ensuring environmental sustainability and developing a global partnership for development. 
4. To enable parliamentarians to interact, in an institutionalized manner with specialized UN Agencies and other comparable Multilateral Agencies, Expert Report, Studies, News and Trendanalyses, etc. regarding achievement of Millennium Development Goals. 
5. To undertake any other Tasks, Projects, Assignments, etc. as the Forum may deem fit.

Parliamentary Group:
RATIONALE OF THE PARLIAMENTARY GROUP:
M.N. Kaul and S.L. Shakdher have nicely explained the rationale of the Indian Parliamentary Group (IPG) in the following way:
The establishment and development of relations among parliaments constitutes part of the regular activities of national parliaments. Although promotion of inter-parliamentary relations has for many years been a significant part of the work of parliamentarians, recently it has received a new thrust due to the increased inter-dependence of nations in a global environment. It is imperative that parliamentarians will join hands to safeguard democracy and work in synergy to confront the challenges before the world and convert them into opportunities to facilitate peace and prosperity in their countries as well as globally.
Parliamentarians from different parts of the world, therefore, have a forum where they can meet to discuss and find out solutions to their common problems. It is here that some sort of crossfertilisation of ideas can take place not only between the older and the younger parliaments, but also between parliamentarians working under different parliamentary systems. These problems are no doubt discussed in inter-governmental conferences; however, those discussions are not so frank and free as they can be at a conclave of legislators.
Inter-parliamentary relations thus assume great importance today when the whole world is beset with many pressing problems. The problems that are faced by one parliament today may confront another tomorrow. It is, therefore, essential that a link should exist between various parliaments of the world. This link is maintained by India through the exchange of delegations, goodwill missions, correspondence, documents, etc. with foreign parliaments through the machinery of the IPG that acts both as the National Group of the Inter-Parliamentary Union (IPU) and also as the India Branch of the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association (CPA).

COMPOSITION OF THE GROUP:
Indian Parliamentary Group (IPG) is an autonomous body. It was formed in the year 1949 in pursuance of a motion adopted by the Constituent Assembly (Legislative).
The membership of IPG is open to all members of Parliament.
The former members of Parliament can also become associate members of the Group. But, the associate members are entitled to limited rights only. They are not entitled to representation at meetings and conferences of the IPU and the CPA. They are also not entitled to the travel concessions provided to members by certain branches of the CPA.
The Speaker of the Lok Sabha is the ex officio president of the Group. The Deputy Speaker of the Lok Sabha and the Deputy Chairman of the Rajya Sabha are the ex officio vice-presidents of the Group. The SecretaryGeneral of the Lok Sabha acts as the ex officio Secretary-General of the Group.

OBJECTIVES OF THE GROUP:
The aims and objects of the Group are mentioned below:
1. To promote personal contacts between members of the Parliament of India. 
2. To study questions of public importance that are likely to come up before the Parliament; arrange seminars, discussions and orientation courses; and bring out publications for the dissemination of information to the members of the Group. 
3. To arrange lectures on political, defence, economic, social and educational problems by the members of the Parliament and distinguished persons. 
4. To arrange visits to foreign countries with a view to develop contacts with members of other parliaments.

FUNCTIONS OF THE GROUP:
The various functions performed and activities undertaken by the Group are as follows:
1. The Group acts as a link between the Parliament of India and the various parliaments of the world. This link is maintained through exchange of delegations, goodwill missions, correspondence, documents, etc. with foreign parliaments. 
2. The Group functions as the (a) National Group of the IPU and (b) main branch of the CPA in India. 
3. Addresses to the members of the Parliament by visiting Heads of State and Government of foreign countries and talks by eminent persons are arranged under the auspices of the Group. 
4. Seminars and symposia on parliamentary subjects of topical interest are organised periodically at national as well as international level. 
5. Members of the Group, when visiting abroad, are given letters of introduction to the Secretaries of the National Groups of the IPU and Secretaries of the CPA branches. The Indian Missions in the countries of visit are also suitably informed so as to enable them to get assistance and usual courtesies. 
6. Only those members of the Parliament who are members of the Group of at least six months’ standing at the time of the composition of the delegation, may be included in the Indian Parliamentary delegations to foreign countries. 
7. An uninterrupted flow of information to members regarding the activities of the Group is maintained through the IPG Newsletter brought out every quarter. It is sent regularly to all members of the Group, including associate members. 
8. As per decision of the Group, an award of Outstanding Parliamentarian was instituted in the year 1995 to be given annually. A committee of five persons, constituted by the Speaker of the Lok Sabha, invites and finalises the nomination for the award. 
9. To encourage bilateral relations, the Group constitutes Parliamentary Friendship Groups with other countries in the Parliament. 
The aims and objectives of the Friendship Group are to maintain political, social and cultural contacts between the two countries and to assist in exchanges of information and experiences on issues relating to parliamentary activities. 

THE GROUP AND IPU:
The IPU is an international organisation of the parliaments of sovereign states. At present, the IPU consists of 153 parliaments of sovereign nations. Its aim is to work for peace and cooperation among peoples and for the firm establishment of representative institutions. It fosters contacts, coordination and the exchange of experience among parliaments and parliamentarians of all member countries and contributes to better knowledge of the working of representative institutions. It also expresses its views on all burning questions of international importance for necessary effective implementation of parliamentary actions and suggests avenues for improving the working standard and capacity of international institutions.
The main advantages of membership of the Group, insofar as its functions as the National Group of the IPU are concerned, are as follows:
1. It helps members of Indian Parliamentary delegations to develop contacts with the parliamentarians of the member countries of the IPU. 
2. The events provide an opportunity to study and understand contemporary changes/reforms taking place in various countries of the world. 
3. It provides facilities to meet parliamentarians in different countries during tours in abroad or in India when visiting Parliamentarians are here. 
4. The members of the Group are eligible to visit foreign countries as members of the Indian Parliamentary delegations to Inter-Parliamentary Conferences.
In the recent past, members of the Group have been holding various positions in the IPU bodies, namely, office bearers in different committees of the IPU, Rapporteurs, Chairman of Drafting Committees, etc. and by virtue of the same, the Group has been successful in putting forward effectively the view point of India on various important issues dealt in the IPU meetings.

THE GROUP AND CPA:
The CPA is an association of about 17000 Commonwealth Parliamentarians spread over 175 National, State, Provincial and Territorial Parliaments. Its aims are to promote knowledge and understanding of the constitutional, legislative, economic, social and cultural systems within a parliamentary democratic framework with particular reference to the countries of the Commonwealth of Nations and to countries having close historical and parliamentary associations with it. Its mission is to promote the advancement of parliamentary democracy by enhancing knowledge and understanding of democratic governance and by building an informed parliamentary community able to deepen the Commonwealth’s democratic commitment and to further cooperation among its parliaments and legislatures.
The main advantages of membership of the Group, insofar as its functions as the main branch of the CPA in India are concerned, are as follows:
1. Conferences and Seminars: Membership provides an opportunity for participation in the plenary and regional conferences, seminars, visits and exchanges of delegations. 
2. Publications: All members of the Group are entitled to receive, free of charge, ‘The Parliamentarian’ quarterly and the newsletter, ‘First Reading’, every second month. 
3. Information: The Parliamentary Information and Reference Centre of the CPA Secretariat provides information to members on parliamentary, constitutional and Commonwealth matters. 
4. Introductions: The CPA branches readily assist in arranging introductions for members visiting other jurisdictions. 
5. Parliamentary Facilities: Members visiting other Commonwealth countries are normally accorded parliamentary courtesies, especially access to debates and local members. 
6. Travel Facilities: Some branches provide for a designated number of their members annually to undertake study tours of Commonwealth and other countries to compare political and procedural developments. Other branches arrange ad hoc visits.

Supreme Court:
Unlike the American Constitution, the Indian Constitution has established an integrated judicial system with the Supreme Court at thetop and the high courts below it. Under a high court (and below the state level), there is a hierarchy of subordinate courts, that is, district courts and other lower courts. This single system of courts, adopted from the Government of India Act of 1935, enforces both Central laws as well as the state laws. In USA, on the other hand, the federal laws are enforced by the federal judiciary and the state laws are enforced by the state judiciary. There is thus a double system of courts in USA–one for the centre and the other for the states. To sum up, India, although a federal country like the USA, has a unified judiciary and one system of fundamental law and justice. The Supreme Court of India was inaugurated on January 28, 1950. It succeeded the Federal Court of India, established under the Government of India Act of 1935. However, the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court is greater than that of its predecessor. This is because, the Supreme Court has replaced the British Privy Council as the highest court of appeal.
Articles 124 to 147 in Part V of the Constitution deal with the organisation, independence, jurisdiction, powers, procedures and so on of the Supreme Court. The Parliament is also authorised to regulate them.

COMPOSITION AND APPOINTMENT:
At present, the Supreme Court consists of thirty-four judges (one chief justice and thirty three other judges). In 2019, the centre notified an increase in the number of Supreme Court judges from thirty-one to thirty-four, including the Chief Justice of India. This followed the enactment of the Supreme Court (Number of Judges) Amendment Act, 2019. Originally, the strength of the Supreme Court was fixed at eight (one chief justice and seven other judges). The Parliament has increased this number of other judges progressively to ten in 1956, to thirteen in 1960, to seventeen in 1977, to twenty-five in 1986, to thirty in 2008 and to thirty-three in 2019.

Appointment of Judges:
The judges of the Supreme Court are appointed by the president. The chief justice is appointed by the president after consultation with such judges of the Supreme Court and high courts as he deems necessary. The other judges are appointed by president after consultation with the chief justice and such other judges of the Supreme Court and the high courts as he deems necessary. The consultation with the chief justice is obligatory in the case of appointment of a judge other than Chief justice.

Controversy over Consultation:
The Supreme Court has given different interpretation of the word ‘consultation’ in the above provision. In the First Judges case (1982), the Court held that consultation does not mean concurrence and it only implies exchange of views. But, in the Second Judges case (1993), the Court reversed its earlier ruling and changed the meaning of the word consultation to concurrence. Hence, it ruled that the advice tendered by the Chief Justice of India is binding on the President in the matters of appointment of the judges of the Supreme Court. But, the Chief Justice would tender his advice on the matter after consulting two of his seniormost colleagues. Similarly, in the Third Judges case (1998), the Court opined that the consultation process to be adopted by the Chief justice of India requires ‘consultation of plurality judges’. The sole opinion of the chief justice of India does not constitute the consultation process. He should consult a collegium of four seniormost judges of the Supreme Court and even if two judges give an adverse opinion, he should not send the recommendation to the government. The court held that the recommendation made by the chief justice of India without complying with the norms and requirements of the consultation process are not binding on the government.

The 99th Constitutional Amendment Act of 2014 and the National Judicial Appointments Commission Act of 2014 have replaced the collegium system of appointing judges to the Supreme Court and High Courts with a new body called the National Judicial Appointments Commission (NJAC). However, in 2015, the Supreme Court has declared both the 99th Constitutional Amendment as well as the NJAC Act as unconstitutional and void. Consequently, the earlier collegium system became operative again. This verdict was delivered by the Supreme Court in the Fourth Judges case (2015). The court opined that the new system (i.e., NJAC) would affect the independence of the judiciary.

Appointment of Chief:
Justice From 1950 to 1973, the practice has been to appoint the seniormost judge of the Supreme Court as the chief justice of India. This established convention was violated in 1973 when A.N. Ray was appointed as the Chief Justice of India by superseding three senior judges. Again in 1977, M.U. Beg was appointed as the chief justice of India by superseding the then senior-most judge. This discretion of the government was curtailed by the Supreme Court in the Second Judges Case (1993), in which the Supreme Court ruled that the seniormost judge of the Supreme Court should alone be appointed to the office of the chief justice of India.

QUALIFICATIONS, OATH AND SALARIES:
Qualifications of Judges of Supreme Court:
A person to be appointed as a judge of the Supreme Court should have the following qualifications:
1. He should be a citizen of India.
2. (a) He should have been a judge of a High Court (or high courts in succession) for five years; or 
(b) He should have been an advocate of a High Court (or High Courts in succession) for ten years; or 
(c) He should be a distinguished jurist in the opinion of the president. From the above, it is clear that the Constitution has not prescribed a minimum age for appointment as a judge of the Supreme Court.

Oath or Affirmation of a judge of the Supreme Court:
A person appointed as a judge of the Supreme Court, before entering upon his Office, has to make and subscribe an oath or affirmation before the President, or some person appointed by him for this purpose. In his oath, a judge of the Supreme Court swears:
1. to bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of India;
2. to uphold the sovereignty and integrity of India;
3. to duly and faithfully and to the best of his ability, knowledge
and judgement perform the duties of the Office without fear or favour, affection or ill-will; and 
4. to uphold the Constitution and the laws.

Salaries and Allowances of the judges of Supreme Court:
The salaries, allowances, privileges, leave and pension of the judges of the Supreme Court are determined from time to time by the Parliament. They cannot be varied to their disadvantage after their appointment except during a financial emergency. In 2018, the salary of the chief justice was increased from Rs. 1 lakh to Rs. 2.80 lakh per month and that of a judge from Rs. 90,000 to Rs. 2.50 lakh per month. They are also paid sumptuary allowance and provided with free accommodation and other facilities like medical, car, telephone, etc.
The retired chief justice and judges are entitled to 50 per cent of their last drawn salary as monthly pension.

TENURE AND REMOVAL:
Tenure of Judges of the Supreme Court:
The Constitution has not fixed the tenure of a judge of the Supreme Court. However, it makes the following three provisions in this regard:
1. He holds office until he attains the age of 65 years. Any question regarding his age is to be determined by such authority and in such manner as provided by Parliament.
2. He can resign his office by writing to the president.
3. He can be removed from his office by the President on the recommendation of the Parliament.

Removal of Judges Supreme Court:
A judge of the Supreme Court can be removed from his Office by an order of the president. The President can issue the removal order only after an address by Parliament has been presented to him in the same session for such removal.5 The address must be supported by a special majority of each House of Parliament (ie, a majority of the total membership of that House and a majority of not less than two-thirds of the members of that House present and voting). The grounds of removal are two–proved misbehaviour or incapacity.

The Judges Enquiry Act (1968) regulates the procedure relating to the removal of a judge of the Supreme Court by the process of impeachment:
1. A removal motion signed by 100 members (in the case of Lok Sabha) or 50 members (in the case of Rajya Sabha) is to be given to the Speaker/ Chairman. 
2. The Speaker/Chairman may admit the motion or refuse to admit it. 
3. If it is admitted, then the Speaker/ Chairman is to constitute a three-member committee to investigate into the charges. 
4. The committee should consist of (a) the chief justice or a judge of the Supreme Court, (b) a chief justice of a high court, and (c) a distinguished jurist. 
5. If the committee finds the judge to be guilty of misbehaviour or suffering from an incapacity, the House can take up the consideration of the motion. 
6. After the motion is passed by each House of Parliament by special majority, an address is presented to the president for removal of the judge. 
7. Finally, the president passes an order removing the judge. 
It is interesting to know that no judge of the Supreme Court has been impeached so far. The first case of impeachment is that of Justice V. Ramaswami of the Supreme Court (1991–1993). Though the enquiry Committee found him guilty of misbehaviour, he could not be removed as the impeachment motion was defeated in the Lok Sabha. The Congress Party abstained from voting.

ACTING, ADHOC AND RETIRED JUDGES:
Acting Chief Justice:
The President can appoint a judge of the Supreme Court as an acting Chief Justice of India when:
1. the office of Chief Justice of India is vacant; or
2. the Chief Justice of India is temporarily absent; or
3. the Chief Justice of India is unable to perform the duties of his office.

Ad hoc Judge:
When there is a lack of quorum of the permanent judges to hold or continue any session of the Supreme Court, the Chief Justice of India can appoint a judge of a High Court as an ad hoc judge of the Supreme Court for a temporary period. He can do so only after consultation with the chief justice of the High Court concerned and with the previous consent of the president. The judge so appointed should be qualified for appointment as a judge of the Supreme Court. It is the duty of the judge so appointed to attend the sittings of the Supreme Court, in priority to other duties of his office. While so attending, he enjoys all the jurisdiction, powers and privileges (and discharges the duties) of a judge of the Supreme Court. 

Retired Judge:
At any time, the chief justice of India can request a retired judge of the Supreme Court or a retired judge of a high court (who is duly qualified for appointment as a judge of the Supreme Court) to act as a judge of the Supreme Court for a temporary period. He can do so only with the previous consent of the president and also of the person to be so appointed. Such a judge is entitled to such allowances as the president may determine. He will also enjoy all the jurisdiction, powers and privileges of a judge of Supreme Court. But, he will not otherwise be deemed to be a judge of the Supreme Court.

SEAT AND PROCEDURE:
Seat of Supreme Court:
The Constitution declares Delhi as the seat of the Supreme Court. But, it also authorises the chief justice of India to appoint other place or places as seat of the Supreme Court. He can take decision in this regard only with the approval of the President. This provision is only optional and not compulsory. This means that no court can give any direction either to the President or to the Chief Justice to appoint any other place as a seat of the Supreme Court.

Procedure of the Court:
The Supreme Court can, with the approval of the president, make rules for regulating generally the practice and procedure of the Court. The Constitutional cases or references made by the President under Article 143 are decided by a Bench consisting of at least five judges. All other cases are decided by single judges and division benches. The judgements are delivered by the open court. All judgements are by majority vote but if differing, then judges can give dissenting judgements or opinions.

INDEPENDENCE OF SUPREME COURT:
The Supreme Court has been assigned a very significant role in the Indian democratic political system. It is a federal court, the highest court of appeal, the guarantor of the fundamental rights of the citizens and guardian of the Constitution. Therefore, its independence becomes very essential for the effective discharge of the duties assigned to it. It should be free from the encroachments, pressures and interferences of the executive (council of ministers) and the Legislature (Parliament). It should be allowed to do justice without fear or favour. The Constitution has made the following provisions to safeguard and ensure the independent and impartial functioning of the Supreme Court:
1. Mode of Appointment of judges of the Supreme Court:
The judges of the Supreme Court are appointed by the President (which means the cabinet) in consultation with the members of the judiciary itself (ie, judges of the Supreme Court and the high courts). This provision curtails the absolute discretion of the executive as well as ensures that the judicial appointments are not based on any political or practical considerations.
2. Security of Tenure of judges of the Supreme Court:
The judges of the Supreme Court are provided with the Security of Tenure. They can be removed from office by the President only in the manner and on the grounds mentioned in the Constitution. This means that they do not hold their office during the pleasure of the President, though they are appointed by him. This is obvious from the fact that no judge of the Supreme Court has been removed (or impeached) so far.
3. Fixed Service Conditions of judges of the Supreme Court:
The salaries, allowances, privileges, leave and pension of the judges of the Supreme Court are determined from time to time by the Parliament. They cannot be changed to their disadvantage after their appointment except during a financial emergency. Thus, the conditions of service of the judges of the Supreme Court remain same during their term of Office.
4. Expenses Charged on Consolidated Fund:
The salaries, allowances and pensions of the judges and the staff as well as all the administrative expenses of the Supreme Court are charged on the Consolidated Fund of India. Thus, they are non-votable by the Parliament (though they can be discussed by it).
5. Conduct of Judges cannot be Discussed:
The Constitution prohibits any discussion in Parliament or in a State Legislature with respect to the conduct of the judges of the Supreme Court in the discharge of their duties, except when an impeachment motion is under consideration of the Parliament.
6. Ban on Practice after Retirement: 
The retired judges of the Supreme Court are prohibited from pleading or acting in any Court or before any authority within the territory of India. This ensures that they do not favour any one in the hope of future favour.
7. Power to Punish for its Contempt:
The Supreme Court can punish any person for its contempt. Thus, its actions and decisions cannot be criticised and opposed by any body. This power is vested in the Supreme Court to maintain its authority, dignity and honour.
8. Freedom to Appoint its Staff:
The Chief Justice of India can appoint officers and servants of the Supreme Court without any interference from the executive. He can also prescribe their conditions of service.
9. Its Jurisdiction cannot be Curtailed:
The Parliament is not authorised to curtail the jurisdiction and powers of the Supreme Court. The Constitution has guaranteed to the Supreme Court, jurisdiction of various kinds. However, the Parliament can extend the same.
10. Separation from Executive:
The Constitution directs the State to take steps to separate the Judiciary from the Executive in the public services. This means that the executive authorities should not possess the judicial powers. Consequently, upon its implementation, the role of executive authorities in judicial administration came to an end.

JURISDICTION AND POWERS OF SUPREME COURT:
The Constitution has conferred a very extensive jurisdiction and vast powers on the Supreme Court. It is not only a Federal Court like the American Supreme Court but also a final court of appeal like the British House of Lords (the Upper House of the British Parliament). It is also the final interpreter and guardian of the Constitution and guarantor of the fundamental rights of the citizens. Further, it has advisory and supervisory powers. Therefore, Alladi Krishnaswamy Ayyar, a member of the Drafting Committee of the Constitution, rightly remarked: “The Supreme Court of India has more powers than any other Supreme Court in any part of the world.” The jurisdiction and powers of the Supreme Court can be classified into the following:
1. Original Jurisdiction.
2. Writ Jurisdiction.
3. Appellate Jurisdiction.
4. Advisory Jurisdiction.
5. A Court of Record.
6. Power of Judicial Review.
7. Constitutional Interpretation
8. Other Powers.

1. Original Jurisdiction of the Supreme Court:
As a federal court, the Supreme Court decides the disputes between different units of the Indian Federation. More elaborately, any dispute:
(a) Between the Centre and one or more states; or
(b) Between the Centre and any state or states on one side and one or more other states on the other side; or
(c) Between two or more states.
In the above federal disputes, the Supreme Court has exclusive original jurisdiction. Exclusive means, no other court can decide such disputes and original means, the power to hear such disputes in the first instance, not by way of appeal.

With regard to the exclusive original jurisdiction of the Supreme Court, two points should be noted. One, the dispute must involve a question (whether of law or fact) on which the existence or extent of a legal right depends. Thus, the questions of political nature are excluded from it. Two, any suit brought before the Supreme Court by a private citizen against the Centre or a state cannot be entertained under this.
Further, this jurisdiction of the Supreme Court does not extend to the following:
(a) A dispute arising out of any pre-Constitution treaty, agreement, covenant, engagement, sanad or other similar instrument.
(b) A dispute arising out of any treaty, agreement, etc., which specifically provides that the said jurisdiction does not extent to such a dispute.
(c) Inter-state water disputes.
(d) Matters referred to the Finance Commission.
(e) Adjustment of certain expenses and pensions between the Centre and the states.
(f) Ordinary dispute of Commercial nature between the Centre and the states.
(g) Recovery of damages by a state against the Centre.
In 1961, the first suit, under the original jurisdiction of the Supreme Court, was brought by West Bengal against the Centre. The State Government challenged the Constitutional validity of the Coal Bearing Areas (Acquisition and Development) Act, 1957, passed by the Parliament. However, the Supreme Court dismissed the suit by upholding the validity of the Act. 

2. Writ Jurisdiction of the Supreme Court:
The Constitution has constituted the Supreme Court as the guarantor and defender of the fundamental rights of the citizens. The Supreme Court is empowered to issue writs including habeas corpus, mandamus, prohibition, quo warranto and certiorari for the enforcement of the fundamental rights of an aggrieved citizen. In this regard, the Supreme Court has original jurisdiction in the sense that an aggrieved citizen can directly go to the Supreme Court, not necessarily by way of appeal. However, the writ jurisdiction of the Supreme Court is not exclusive. The high courts are also empowered to issue writs for the enforcement of the Fundamental Rights. It means, when the Fundamental Rights of a citizen are violated, the aggrieved party has the option of moving either the high court or the Supreme Court directly.
Therefore, the original jurisdiction of the Supreme Court with regard to federal disputes is different from its original jurisdiction with regard to disputes relating to fundamental rights. In the first case, it is exclusive and in the second case, it is concurrent with high courts jurisdiction. Moreover, the parties involved in the first case are units of the federation (Centre and states) while the dispute in the second case is between a citizen and the Government (Central or state).
There is also a difference between the writ jurisdiction of the Supreme Court and that of the high court. The Supreme Court can issue writs only for the enforcement of the Fundamental Rights and not for other purposes. The high court, on the other hand, can issue writs not only for the enforcement of the fundamental rights but also for other purposes. It means that the writ jurisdiction of the high court is wider than that of the Supreme Court. But, the Parliament can confer on the Supreme Court, the power to issue writs for other purposes also.

3. Appellate Jurisdiction of the Supreme Court:
As mentioned earlier, the Supreme Court has not only succeeded the Federal Court of India but also replaced the British Privy Council as the highest court of appeal. The Supreme Court is primarily a court of appeal and hears appeals against the judgements of the lower courts. It enjoys a wide appellate jurisdiction which can be classified under four heads:
(a) Appeals in constitutional matters.
(b) Appeals in civil matters.
(c) Appeals in criminal matters.
(d) Appeals by special leave.

(a) Constitutional Matters:
In the constitutional cases, an appeal can be made to the Supreme Court against the judgement of a high court if the high court certifies that the case involves a substantial question of law that requires the interpretation of the Constitution. Based on the certificate, the party in the case can appeal to the Supreme Court on the ground that the question has been wrongly decided.

(b) Civil Matters:
In civil cases, an appeal lies to the Supreme Court from any judgement of a high court if the high court certifies–
(i) that the case involves a substantial question of law of general importance; and
(ii) that the question needs to be decided by the Supreme Court.
Originally, only those civil cases that involved a sum of Rs. 20,000 could be appealed before the Supreme Court. But this monetary limit was removed by the 30th Constitutional Amendment Act of 1972.

(c) Criminal Matters: 
The Supreme Court hears appeals against the judgement in a criminal proceeding of a high court if the high court–
(i) has on appeal reversed an order of acquittal of an accused person and sentenced him to death; or
(ii) has taken before itself any case from any subordinate court and convicted the accused person and sentenced him to death; or
(iii) certifies that the case is a fit one for appeal to the Supreme Court.
In the first two cases, an appeal lies to the Supreme Court as a matter of right (ie, without any certificate of the high court). But if the high court has reversed the order of conviction and has ordered the acquittal of the accused, there is no right to appeal to the Supreme Court.

In 1970, the Parliament had enlarged the Criminal Appellate Jurisdiction of the Supreme Court. Accordingly, an appeal lies to the Supreme Court from the judgement of a high court if the high court:
(i) has on appeal, reversed an order of acquittal of an accused person and sentenced him to imprisonment for life or for ten years; or
(ii) has taken before itself any case from any subordinate court and convicted the accused person and sentenced him to imprisonment for life or for ten years.
Further, the appellate jurisdiction of the Supreme Court extends to all civil and criminal cases in which the Federal Court of India had jurisdiction to hear appeals from the high court but which are not covered under the civil and criminal appellate jurisdiction of the Supreme Court mentioned above.

(d) Appeal by Special Leave:
The Supreme Court is authorised to grant in its discretion special leave to appeal from any judgement in any matter passed by any court or tribunal in the country (except military tribunal and court martial). This provision contains the four aspects as under:
(i) It is a discretionary power and hence, cannot be claimed as a matter of right.
(ii) It can be granted in any judgement whether final or interlocutory.
(iii) It may be related to any matter–constitutional, civil, criminal, income-tax, labour, revenue, advocates, etc.
(iv) It can be granted against any court or tribunal and not necessarily against a high court (of course, except a military court).
Thus, the scope of this provision is very wide and it vests the Supreme Court with a plenary jurisdiction to hear appeals. On the exercise of this power, the Supreme Court itself held that ‘being an exceptional and overriding power, it has to be exercised sparingly and with caution and only in special extraordinary situations. Beyond that it is not possible to fetter the exercise of this power by any set formula or rule’.

4. Advisory Jurisdiction of the Supreme Court:
The Constitution (Article 143) authorises the president to seek the opinion of the Supreme Court in the two categories of matters:
(a) On any question of law or fact of public importance which has arisen or which is likely to arise.
(b) On any dispute arising out of any pre-constitution treaty, agreement, covenant, engagement, sanad or other similar instruments.
In the first case, the Supreme Court may tender or may refuse to tender its opinion to the president. But, in the second case, the Supreme Court ‘must’ tender its opinion to the president. In both the cases, the opinion expressed by the Supreme Court is only advisory and not a judicial pronouncement. 
Hence, it is not binding on the president; he may follow or may not follow the opinion. However, it facilitates the government to have an authoritative legal opinion on a matter to be decided by it. So far (2019), the President has made fifteen references to the Supreme Court under its advisory jurisdiction (also known as consultative jurisdiction). These are mentioned below in the chronological order.
1. Delhi Laws Act in 1951
2. Kerala Education Bill in 1958
3. Berubari Union in 1960
4. Sea Customs Act in 1963
5. Keshav Singh’s case relating to the privileges of the Legislature in 1964
6. Presidential Election in 1974
7. Special Courts Bill in 1978
8. Jammu and Kashmir Resettlement Act in 1982
9. Cauvery Water Disputes Tribunal in 1992
10. Rama Janma Bhumi case in 1993
11. Consultation process to be adopted by the chief justice of India in 1998
12. Legislative competence of the Centre and States on the subject of natural gas and liquefied natural gas in 2001
13. The constitutional validity of the Election Commission’s decision on deferring the Gujarat Assembly Elections in 2002
14. Punjab Termination of Agreements Act in 2004
15. 2G spectrum case verdict and the mandatory auctioning of natural resources across all sectors in 2012

5. A Court of Record:
As a Court of Record, the Supreme Court has two powers: 
(a) The judgements, proceedings and acts of the Supreme Court are recorded for perpetual memory and testimony. These records are admitted to be of evidentiary value and cannot be questioned when produced before any court. They are recognised as legal precedents and legal references. 
(b) It has power to punish for contempt of court, either with simple imprisonment for a term up to six months or with fine up to Rs. 2,000 or with both. In 1991, the Supreme Court has ruled that it has power to punish for contempt not only of itself but also of high courts, subordinate courts and tribunals functioning in the entire country. Contempt of court may be civil or criminal. Civil contempt means wilful disobedience to any judgement, order, writ or other process of a court or wilful breach of an undertaking given to a court. Criminal contempt means the publication of any matter or doing an act which–
(i) scandalises or lowers the authority of a court; or 
(ii) prejudices or interferes with the due course of a judicial proceeding; or 
(iii) interferes or obstructs the administration of justice in any other manner.
However, innocent publication and distribution of some matter, fair and accurate report of judicial proceedings, fair and reasonable criticism of judicial acts and comment on the administrative side of the judiciary do not amount to contempt of court.

6. Power of Judicial Review of the Supreme Court:
Judicial review is the power of the Supreme Court to examine the constitutionality of legislative enactments and executive orders of both the Central and state governments. On examination, if they are found to be violative of the Constitution (ultra-vires), they can be declared as illegal, unconstitutional and invalid (null and void) by the Supreme Court. Consequently, they cannot be enforced by the Government.

7. Constitutional Interpretation:
The Supreme Court is the ultimate interpreter of the Constitution. It can give final version to the spirit and content of the provisions of the constitution and the verbiage used in the constitution.
While interpreting the constitution, the Supreme Court is guided by a number of doctrines. In other words, the Supreme Court applies various doctrines in interpreting the constitution. The important doctrines are mentioned below:
1. Doctrine of Severability
2. Doctrine of Waiver
3. Doctrine of Eclipse
4. Doctrine of Territorial Nexus
5. Doctrine of Pith and Substance
6. Doctrine of Colourable Legislation
7. Doctrine of Implied Powers
8. Doctrine of Incidental and Ancillary Powers
9. Doctrine of Precedent
10. Doctrine of Occupied Field
11. Doctrine of Prospective Overruling
12. Doctrine of Harmonious Construction
13. Doctrine of Liberal Interpretation

8. Other Powers:
Besides the above, the Supreme Court has numerous other powers:
(a) It decides the disputes regarding the election of the president and the vicepresident. In this regard, it has the original, exclusive and final authority. 
(b) It enquires into the conduct and behaviour of the chairman and members of the Union Public Service Commission on a reference made by the president. If it finds them guilty of misbehaviour, it can recommend to the president for their removal. The advice tendered by the Supreme Court in this regard is binding on the President. 
(c) It has power to review its own judgement or order. Thus, it is not bound by its previous decision and can depart from it in the interest of justice or community welfare. In brief, the Supreme Court is a self-correcting agency. For example, in the Kesavananda Bharati case (1973), the Supreme Court departed from its previous judgement in the Golak Nath case (1967). 
(d) It is authorised to withdraw the cases pending before the high courts and dispose them by itself. It can also transfer a case or appeal pending before one high court to another high court. 
(e) Its law is binding on all courts in India. Its decree or order is enforceable throughout the country. All authorities (civil and judicial) in the country should act in aid of the Supreme Court. 
(f) It has power of judicial superintendence and control over all the courts and tribunals functioning in the entire territory of the country.
The Supreme Court’s jurisdiction and powers with respect to matters in the Union list can be enlarged by the Parliament. Further, its jurisdiction and powers with respect to other matters can be enlarged by a special agreement of the Centre and the states.

SUPREME COURT ADVOCATES:
Three categories of Advocates are entitled to practice law before the Supreme Court. They are:
1. Senior Advocates:
These are Advocates who are designated as Senior Advocates by the Supreme Court of India or by any High Court. The Court can designate any Advocate, with his consent, as Senior Advocate if in its opinion by virtue of his ability, standing at the Bar or special knowledge or experience in law the said Advocate is deserving of such distinction. A Senior Advocate is not entitled to appear without an Advocate-on-Record in the Supreme Court or without a junior in any other court or tribunal in India. He is also not entitled to accept instructions to draw pleadings or affidavits, advise on evidence or do any drafting work of an analogous kind in any court or tribunal in India or undertake conveyancing work of any kind whatsoever but this prohibition shall not extend to settling any such matter as aforesaid in consultation with a junior.

2. Advocates-on-Record:
Only these advocates are entitled to file any matter or document before the Supreme Court. They can also file an appearance or act for a party in the Supreme Court.

3. Other Advocates:
These are advocates whose names are entered on the roll of any State Bar Council maintained under the Advocates Act, 1961 and they can appear and argue any matter on behalf of a party in the Supreme Court but they are not entitled to file any document or matter before the Court.


Judicial Review:
The doctrine of judicial review originated and developed in the USA. It was propounded for the first time in the famous case of Marbury versus Madison (1803) by John Marshall, the then chief justice of the American Supreme Court. In India, on the other hand, the Constitution itself confers the power of judicial review on the judiciary (both the Supreme Court as well as High Courts). Further, the Supreme Court has declared the power of judicial review as a basic feature of the Constitution or an element of the basic structure of the Constitution. Hence, the power of judicial review cannot be curtailed or excluded even by a constitutional amendment.

MEANING OF JUDICIAL REVIEW:
Judicial review is the power of the judiciary to examine the constitutionality of legislative enactments and executive orders of both the Central and State governments. On examination, if they are found to be violative of the Constitution (ultra vires), they can be declared as illegal, unconstitutional and invalid (null and void) by the judiciary. Consequently, they cannot be enforced by the Government.
Justice Syed Shah Mohamed Quadri has classified the judicial review into the following three categories:
1. Judicial review of constitutional amendments.
2. Judicial review of legislation of the Parliament and State Legislatures and subordinate legislations.
3. Judicial review of administrative action of the Union and State and authorities under the state.
The Supreme Court used the power of judicial review in various cases, as for example, the Golaknath case (1967), the Bank Nationalisation case (1970), the Privy Purses Abolition case (1971), the Kesavananda Bharati case (1973), the Minerva Mills case (1980), and so on.
In 2015, the Supreme Court declared both the 99th Constitutional Amendment, 2014 and the National Judicial Appointments Commission (NJAC) Act, 2014 as unconstitutional and null and void.

IMPORTANCE OF JUDICIAL REVIEW:
Judicial review is needed for the following reasons:
(a) To uphold the principle of the supremacy of the Constitution.
(b) To maintain federal equilibrium (balance between the Centre and the states).
(c) To protect the Fundamental Rights of the citizens.
In a number of cases, the Supreme Court has pointed out the significance of the power of judicial review in our country. Some of the observations made by it, in this regard, are given below: “In India it is the Constitution that is supreme and that a statute law to be valid, must be in conformity with the constitutional requirements and it is for the judiciary to decide whether any enactment is constitutional or not”.
“Our constitution contains express provisions for judicial review of legislation as to its conformity with the constitution. This is especially true as regards the Fundamental Rights, to which the court has been assigned the role of sentinel on the qui vive”.
“As long as some Fundamental Rights exist and are a part of the Constitution, the power of judicial review has also to be exercised with a view to see that the guarantees afforded by these Rights are not contravened”.
“The Constitution is supreme lex, the permanent law of the land, and there is no branch of government above it. Every organ of government, be it the executive or the legislature of the judiciary, derives its authority from the Constitution and it has to act within the limits of its authority. No one however highly placed and no authority howsoever lofty, can claim that it shall be the sole judge of the extent of its power under the Constitution or whether its action is within the confines of such power laid down by the constitution. This Court is the ultimate interpreter of the Constitution and to this Court is assigned the delicate task of determining what is the power conferred on each branch of government, whether it is limited, and if so, what are the limits and whether any action of that branch transgresses such limits”.
“It is the function of the Judges, may their duty, to pronounce upon the validity of laws. If courts are totally deprived of that power, the Fundamental Rights conferred on the people will become a mere adornment because rights without remedies are as writ in water. A controlled Constitution will then become uncontrolled”.

“The judges of the Supreme Court have been entrusted with the task of upholding the Constitution and to this end, have been conferred the power to interpret it. It is they who have to ensure that the balance of power envisaged by the Constitution is maintained and that the legislature and the executive do not, in the discharge of their functions, transgress constitutional limitations”.
“The founding fathers very wisely, therefore, incorporated in the Constitution itself the provisions of judicial review so as to maintain the balance of federalism, to protect the Fundamental Rights and Fundamental Freedoms guaranteed to the citizens and to afford a useful weapon for availability, availment and enjoyment of equality, liberty and Fundamental Freedoms and to help to create a healthy nationalism. The function of judicial review is a part of the constitutional interpretation itself. It adjusts the Constitution to meet new conditions and needs of the time”.

CONSTITUTIONAL PROVISIONS FOR JUDICIAL REVIEW:
Though the phrase ‘Judicial Review’ has nowhere been used in the Constitution, the provisions of several Articles explicitly confer the power of judicial review on the Supreme Court and the High Courts. These provisions are explained below:
1. Article 13 declares that all laws that are inconsistent with or in derogation of the Fundamental Rights shall be null and void. 
2. Article 32 guarantees the right to move the Supreme Court for the enforcement of the Fundamental Rights and empowers the Supreme Court to issue directions or orders or writs for that purpose. 
3. Article 131 provides for the original jurisdiction of the Supreme Court in centre-state and inter-state disputes. 
4. Article 132 provides for the appellate jurisdiction of the Supreme Court in constitutional cases. 
5. Article 133 provides for the appellate jurisdiction of the Supreme Court in civil cases. 
6. Article 134 provides for the appellate jurisdiction of the Supreme Court in criminal cases. 
7. Article 134-A deals with the certificate for appeal to the Supreme Court from the High Courts. 
8. Article 135 empowers the Supreme Court to exercise the jurisdiction and powers of the Federal Court under any preconstitution law. 
9. Article 136 authorises the Supreme Court to grant special leave to appeal from any court or tribunal (except military tribunal and court martial). 
10. Article 143 authorises the President to seek the opinion of the Supreme Court on any question of law or fact and on any pre-constitution legal matters. 
11. Article 226 empowers the High Courts to issue directions or orders or writs for the enforcement of the Fundamental Rights and for any other purpose. 
12. Article 227 vests in the High Courts the power of superintendence over all courts and tribunals within their respective territorial jurisdictions (except military courts or tribunals). 
13. Article 245 deals with the territorial extent of laws made by Parliament and by the Legislatures of States. 
14. Article 246 deals with the subject matter of laws made by Parliament and by the Legislatures of States (i.e., Union List, State List and Concurrent List). 
15. Articles 251 and 254 provide that in case of a conflict between the central law and state law, the central law prevails over the state law and the state law shall be void. 
16. Article 372 deals with the continuance in force of the preconstitution laws.

SCOPE OF JUDICIAL REVIEW:
The constitutional validity of a legislative enactment or an executive order can be challenged in the Supreme Court or in the High Courts on the following three grounds.
(a) it infringes the Fundamental Rights (Part III),
(b) it is outside the competence of the authority which has framed it, and
(c) it is repugnant to the constitutional provisions.
From the above, it is clear that the scope of judicial review in India is narrower than what exists in the USA, though the American Constitution does not explicitly mention the concept of judicial review in any of its provisions. This is because, the American Constitution provides for ‘due process of law’ against that of ‘procedure established by law’ which is contained in the Indian Constitution. The difference between the two is: “The due process of law gives wide scope to the Supreme Court to grant protection to the rights of its citizens. It can declare laws violative of these rights void not only on substantive grounds of being unlawful, but also on procedural grounds of being unreasonable. Our Supreme Court, while determining the constitutionality of a law, however examines only the substantive question i.e., whether the law is within the powers of the authority concerned or not. It is not expected to go into the question of its reasonableness, suitability or policy implications”.
The exercise of wide power of judicial review by the American Supreme Court in the name of ‘due process of law’ clause has made the critics to describe it as a ‘third chamber’ of the Legislature, a super-legislature, the arbiter of social policy and so on. This American principle of judicial supremacy is also recognised in our constitutional system, but to a limited extent. Nor do we fully follow the British Principle of parliamentary supremacy. There are many limitations on the sovereignty of Parliament in our country, like the written character of the Constitution, the federalism with division of powers, the Fundamental Rights and the judicial review. In effect, what exists in India is a synthesis of both, that is, the American principle of judicial supremacy and the British principle of parliamentary supremacy.

JUDICIAL REVIEW OF THE NINTH SCHEDULE:
Article 31B saves the acts and regulations included in the Ninth Schedule from being challenged and invalidated on the ground of contravention of any of the Fundamental Rights. Article 31B along with the Ninth Schedule was added by the 1st Constitutional Amendment Act of 1951.
Originally (in 1951), the Ninth Schedule contained only 13 acts and regulations but at present (in 2016) their number is 282.11 Of these, the acts and regulations of the state legislature deal with land reforms and abolition of the zamindari system and that of the Parliament deal with other matters. 
However, in a significant judgement delivered in I.R. Coelho case (2007) , the Supreme Court ruled that there could not be any blanket immunity from judicial review of laws included in the Ninth Schedule. The court held that judicial review is a ‘basic feature’ of the constitution and it could not be taken away by putting a law under the Ninth Schedule. It said that the laws placed under the Ninth Schedule after April 24, 1973, are open to challenge in court if they violated Fundamental Rights guaranteed under the Articles 14, 15, 19 and 21 or the ‘basic structure’ of the Constitution. It was on April 24, 1973, that the Supreme Court first propounded the doctrine of ‘basic structure’ or ‘basic features’ of the constitution in its landmark verdict in the Kesavananda Bharati case.
While delivering the above judgement, the Supreme Court made the following conclusions:
1. A law that abrogates or abridges rights guaranteed by Part III of the Constitution may violate the basic structure doctrine, or it may not. If former is the consequence of law, whether by an amendment of any Article of Part III or by an insertion in the Ninth Schedule, such law will have to be invalidated in the exercise of judicial review power of the Court. The constitutional validity of the Ninth Schedule laws on the touchstone of basic structure doctrine can be adjudged by applying the direct impact and effect test, i.e., rights test, which means the form of an amendment is not the relevant factor, but the consequence thereof would be the determinative factor.
2. The majority judgement in the Kesavanand Bharati Case read with Indira Gandhi case15 requires the validity of each new constitutional Amendment to be judged on its own merits. The actual effect and impact of the law on the rights guaranteed under Part III has to be taken into account for determining whether or not it destroys basic structure. The impact test would determine the validity of the challenge.
3. All amendments to the Constitution made on or after 24th April, 1973 by which the Ninth Schedule is amended by inclusion of various laws therein shall have to be tested on the touchstone of the basic or essential features of the Constitution as reflected in Article 21 read with Articles 14 and 19 and the principles underlying them. To put it differently, even though an act is put in the Ninth Schedule by a Constitutional Amendment, its provisions would be open to attack on the ground that they destroy or damage the basic structure if the Fundamental Right or rights taken away or abrogated pertains or pertain to the basic structure.
4. Justification for conferring protection, not blanket protection, on the laws included in the Ninth Schedule by Constitutional Amendments shall be a matter of constitutional adjudication by examining the nature and extent of infraction of a Fundamental Right by a statute, sought to be constitutionally protected, and on the touchstone of the basic structure doctrine as reflected in Article 21 read with Articles 14 and 19 by application of the “rights test” and the “essence of the right” test taking the synoptic view of the articles in Part III as held in the Indira Gandhi Case. Applying the above test to the Ninth Schedule laws, if the infraction affects the basic structure, then such a law or laws will not get the protection of the Ninth Schedule. When the triangle of Article 21 read with Article 14 and Article 19 is sought to be eliminated not only the “essence of the right” test but also the “rights test” has to apply. There is also a difference between the “rights test” and the “essence of the right” test. Both form part of application of the basic structure doctrine. When in a controlled constitution conferring limited power of amendment, an entire chapter is made in applicable, the “essence of the right” test as applied in Nagaraj case will have no applicability. In such a situation, to judge the validity of the law, it is the “rights test” which is more appropriate.
5. If the validity of any Ninth Schedule law has already been upheld by this Court, it would not be open to challenge such law again on the principles declared by this judgment. However, if a law held to be violative of any rights in Part III is subsequently incorporated in the Ninth Schedule after 24th April, 1973, such a violation / infraction shall be open to challenge on the ground that it destroys or damages the basic structure as indicated in Article 21 read with Articles 14 and 19 and the principles underlying them.
6. Action taken and transactions finalized as a result of the impugned Acts shall not be open to challenge.

Judicial Activism:
The concept of judicial activism originated and developed in the USA. This term was first coined in 1947 by Arthur Schlesinger Jr., an American historian and educator.1 In India, the doctrine of judicial activism was introduced in mid1970s. Justice V.R. Krishna Iyer, Justice P.N. Bhagwati, Justice O. Chinnappa Reddy and Justice D.A. Desai laid the foundations of judicial activism in the country.

MEANING OF JUDICIAL ACTIVISM:
Judicial activism denotes the proactive role played by the judiciary in the protection of the rights of citizens and in the promotion of justice in the society. In other words, it implies the assertive role played by the judiciary to force the other two organs of the government (legislature and executive) to discharge their constitutional duties.
Judicial activism is also known as “judicial dynamism”. It is the antithesis of “judicial restraint”, which means the self-control exercised by the judiciary.
Judicial activism is defined in the following way:
1. “Judicial activism is a way of exercising judicial power that motivates judges to depart from normally practised strict adherence to judicial precedent in favour of progressive and new social policies. It is commonly marked by decision calling for social engineering, and occasionally these decisions represent intrusion in the legislative and executive matters”.
2. “Judicial activism is the practice in the judiciary of protecting or expanding individual rights through decisions that depart from established precedent, or are independent of, or in opposition to supposed constitutional or legislation intent”.
3. “Judicial activism can be defined as the process of lawmaking by judges. It means an active interpretation of existing legislation by a judge, made with a view to enhance the utility of that legislation for social betterment. Judicial activism is different from judicial pessimism which means interpretation of existing provisions of law, without an attempt to enhance its beneficial aspects”.
4. “Judicial activism is a philosophy of judicial decision-making whereby judges allow their personal views about public policy, among other factors, to guide their decisions”.
5. “Judicial activism is a procedure to evolve new principles, concepts, maxims, formulae and relief to do justice or to expand the standing of the litigant and open the door of courts for needy or to entertain litigation affecting the entire society or a section of it”.
The concept of judicial activism is closely related to the concept of Public Interest Litigation (PIL). It is the judicial activism of the Supreme Court which is the major factor for the rise of PIL. In other words, PIL is an outcome of judicial activism. In fact, PIL is the most popular form (or manifestation) of judicial activism.

JUDICIAL REVIEW AND JUDICIAL ACTIVISM:
The concepts of judicial review and judicial activism are closely related to each other. But, there is a difference between them. The following points bring out this difference:
1. Since about the mid-20th century, a version of judicial review has acquired the nick-name of judicial activism, especially in the USA. In India, the participants in the debate mix up judicial activism with judicial review. The former is that form of latter in which judges participate in law-making policies, i.e., not only they uphold or invalidate laws in terms of constitutional provisions, but also exercise their policy preferences in doing so.
2. The concept of judicial activism is inherent in judicial review, which empowers the court to uphold the constitution and declare the laws and action inconsistent with the constitution as void. Judicial activism is necessary for ensuring proper discharge of duties by other organs. 
3. The term “judicial activism” came into currency some time in the twentieth century to describe the act of judicial legislation i.e., judges making positive law. However, there is no standard definition of the term “judicial activism”. As a whole it can be said that judicial activism stresses the importance of judicial review and a powerful judiciary in the protection and promotion of certain core rights. 
4. The expanded concept of locus standi in connection with PIL, by judicial interpretation from time-to-time, has expanded the jurisdictional limits of the courts exercising judicial review. This expanded role has been given the title of “judicial activism” by those who are critical of this expanded role of the judiciary. 
5. Judicial activism, as regards constitutional cases, falls under the rubric of what is commonly called judicial review, and at the broadest level, it is any occasion where a court intervenes and strikes down a piece of duly enacted legislation.

JUSTIFICATION OF JUDICIAL ACTIVISM:
According to Dr. B.L. Wadehra, the reasons for judicial activism are as follows:
(i) There is near collapse of the responsible government, when the Legislature and Executive fail to discharge their respective functions. This results in erosion of the confidence in the Constitution and democracy amongst the citizens. 
(ii) The citizens of the country look up to the judiciary for the protection of their rights and freedoms. This leads to tremendous pressure on judiciary to step in aid for the suffering masses. 
(iii) Judicial Enthusiasm, that is, the judges like to participate in the social reforms that take place in the changing times. It encourages the Public Interest Litigation and liberalises the principle of ‘Locus Standi’. 
(iv) Legislative Vacuum, that is, there may be certain areas, which have not been legislated upon. It is therefore, upon court to indulge in judicial legislation and to meet the changing social needs. 
(v) The Constitution of India has itself adopted certain provisions, which gives judiciary enough scope to legislate or to play an active role.

Similarly, Subhash Kashyap observes that certain eventualities may be conceived when the judiciary may have to overstep its normal jurisdiction and intervene in areas otherwise falling within the domain of the legislature and the executive:
(i) When the legislature fails to discharge its responsibilities. 
(ii) In case of a ‘hung’ legislature when the government it provides is weak, insecure and busy only in the struggle for survival and, therefore, unable to take any decision which displeases any caste, community, or other group. 
(iii) Those in power may be afraid of taking honest and hard decisions for fear of losing power and, for that reason, may have public issues referred to courts as issues of law in order to mark time and delay decisions or to pass on the odium of strong decision-making to the courts. 
(iv) Where the legislature and the executive fail to protect the basic rights of citizens, like the right to live a decent life, healthy surroundings, or to provide honest, efficient and just system of laws and administration. 
(v) Where the court of law is misused by a strong authoritarian parliamentary party government for ulterior motives, as was sought to be done during the emergency aberration. 
(vi) Sometimes, the courts themselves knowingly or unknowingly become victims of human, all too human, weaknesses of craze for populism, publicity, playing to the media and hogging the headlines.

According to Dr. Vandana, the concept of judicial activism can be seen to be reflecting from the following trends, namely:
(i) Expansion of rights of hearing in the administrative process.
(ii) Excessive delegation without limitation.
(iii) Expansion of judicial control over discretionary powers.
(iv) Expansion of judicial review over the administration.
(v) Promotion of open government.
(vi) Indiscriminate exercise of contempt power.
(vii) Exercise of jurisdiction when non-exist.
(viii) Over extending the standard rules of interpretation in its search to achieve economic, social and educational objectives.
(ix) Passing of orders which are per se unworkable.

ACTIVATORS OF JUDICIAL ACTIVISM:
Upendra Baxi, an eminent jurist, has delineated the following typology of social / human rights activists who activated judicial activism:
1. Civil Rights Activists: These groups primarily focus on civil and political rights issues. 
2. People Rights Activists: These groups focus on social and economic rights within the contexts of state repression of people’s movements. 
3. Consumer Rights Groups: These formations raise issues of consumer rights within the framework of accountability of the polity and the economy. 
4. Bonded Labour Groups: These groups ask for judicial activism is nothing short of annihilation of wage slavery in India. 
5. Citizens for Environmental Action: These groups activate an activist judiciary to combat increasing environmental degradation and pollution. 
6. Citizen Groups against Large Irrigation Projects: These activist formations ask the Indian judiciary the impossible for any judiciary in the world, namely, cease to and desist from ordering against mega irrigation projects. 
7. Rights of Child Groups: These groups focus on child labour, the right to literacy, juveniles in custodial institutions and rights of children born to sex workers. 
8. Custodial Rights Groups: These groups include social action by prisoners’ rights groups, women under state ‘protective’ custody and persons under preventive detention. 
9. Poverty Rights Groups: These groups litigate issues concerning draught and famine relief and urban impoverished. 
10. Indigenous People’s Rights Groups: These groups agitate for issues of forest dwellers, citizens of the Fifth and Sixth Schedules of the Indian Constitution and identity rights. 
11. Women’s Rights Groups: These groups agitate for issues of gender equality, gender-based violence and harassment, rape and dowry murders. 
12. Bar-based Groups: These associations agitate for issues concerning autonomy and accountability of the Indian judiciary. 
13. Media Autonomy Groups: These groups focus on the autonomy and accountability of the press and instruments of mass media owned by the State. 
14. Assorted Lawyer-Based Groups: This category includes the critically influential lawyers’ groups which agitate for various causes. 
15. Assorted Individual Petitioners: This category includes freelance activist individuals.

APPREHENSIONS OF JUDICIAL ACTIVISM:
The same jurist Upendra Baxi also presented a typology of fears which are generated by judicial activism. He observes: “The facts entail invocation of a wide range of fears. The invocation is designed to bring into a nervous rationality among India’s most conscientious justices”. He described the following types of fears:
1. Ideological fears: (Are they usurping powers of the legislature, the executive or of other autonomous institutions in a civil society?) 
2. Epistemic fears: (Do they have enough knowledge in economic matters of a Manmohan Singh, in scientific matters of the Czars of the atomic energy establishment, the captains of the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research, and so on?) 
3. Management fears: (Are they doing justice by adding this kind of litigation work load to a situation of staggering growth of arrears?) 
4. Legitimation fears: (Are not they causing depletion of their symbolic and instrumental authority by passing orders in public interest litigation which the executive may bypass or ignore? Would not the people’s faith in judiciary, a democratic recourse, be thus eroded?) 
5. Democratic fears: (Is a profusion of public interest litigation nurturing democracy or depleting its potential for the future?) 
6. Biographic fears: (What would be my place in national affairs after superannuation if I overdo this kind of litigation?)

JUDICIAL ACTIVISM VS. JUDICIAL RESTRAINT:
Meaning of Judicial Restraint:
Judicial activism and judicial restraint are the two alternative judicial philosophies in the United States. Those who subscribe to judicial restraint contend that the role of judges should be scrupulously limited; their job is merely to say what the law is, leaving the business of lawmaking where it properly belongs, that is, with the legislators and the executives. Under no circumstances, moreover, should judges allow their personal political values and policy agendas to colour their judicial opinions. This view holds that the ‘original intent’ of the authors of the constitution and its amendments is knowable, and must guide the courts.

Assumptions of Judicial Restraint:
In the USA, the doctrine of judicial restraint is based on the following six assumptions:
1. The Court is basically undemocratic because it is nonelective and presumably non-responsive to the popular will. Because of its alleged oligarchic composition the court should defer wherever possible to the ‘more’ democratic branches of government. 
2. The questionable origins of the great power of judicial review, a power not specifically granted by the Constitution. 
3. The doctrine of separation of powers. 
4. The concept of federalism, dividing powers between the nation and the states requires of the Court deference toward the action of state governments and officials. 
5. The non-ideological but pragmatic assumption that since the Court is dependent on the Congress for its jurisdiction and resources, and dependent on public acceptance for its effectiveness, it ought not to overstep its boundaries without consideration of the risks involved. 
6. The aristocratic notion that, being a court of law, and inheritor and custodian of the Anglo-American legal tradition, it ought not to go too far to the level of politics–law being the process of reason and judgment and politics being concerned only with power and influence.
From the above, it is clear that all the assumptions (except the second dealing with the judicial review) hold good in the Indian context too.

Supreme Court Observations:
While delivering a judgement in December 2007, the Supreme Court of India called for judicial restraint and asked courts not to take over the functions of the legislature or the executive, saying there is a broad separation of powers under the Constitution and each organ of the state must have respect for others and should not encroach on others’ domain. In this context, the concerned Bench of the court made the following observations:
1. The Bench said, “We are repeatedly coming across cases where judges are unjustifiably trying to perform executive or legislative functions. This is clearly unconstitutional. In the name of judicial activism, judges cannot cross their limits and try to take over functions which belong to another organ of the state”. 
2. The Bench said, “Judges must know their limits and must not try to run the government. They must have modesty and humility, and not behave like emperors.” 
3. Quoting from the book ‘The Spirit of Laws’ by Montesquieu on the consequences of not maintaining separation of powers among the three organs, the Bench said the French political philosopher’s “warning is particularly apt and timely for the Indian judiciary today, since very often it is rightly criticised for ‘overreach’ and encroachment on the domain of the other two organs.” 
4. Judicial activism must not become judicial adventurism, the Bench warned the courts Adjudication must be done within the system of historically validated restraints and conscious minimisation of judges’ preferences. 
5. “The courts must not embarrass administrative authorities and must realise that administrative authorities have expertise in the field of administration while the court does not.” 
6. The Bench said, “The justification often given for judicial encroachment on the domain of the executive or the legislature is that the other two organs are not doing their jobs properly. Even assuming this is so, the same allegations can be made against the judiciary too because there are cases pending in courts for half-a-century.” 
7. If the legislature or the executive was not functioning properly, it was for the people to correct the defects by exercising their franchise properly in the next elections and voting for candidates who would fulfil their expectations or by other lawful methods, e.g., peaceful demonstrations. 
8. “The remedy is not in the judiciary taking over the legislative or the executive functions, because that will not only violate the delicate balance of power enshrined in the Constitution but also (because) the judiciary has neither the expertise nor the resources to perform these functions.” 
9. The Bench said: “Judicial restraint is consistent with and complementary to the balance of power among the three independent branches of the state. It accomplishes this in two ways: first, judicial restraint not only recognises the equality of the other two branches with the judiciary, it also fosters that equality by minimising inter-branch interference by the judiciary. Second, judicial restraint tends to protect the independence of the judiciary. When courts encroach on the legislative or administrative fields almost inevitably voters, legislators, and other elected officials will conclude that the activities of judges should be closely monitored.


Public Interest Litigation (PIL):
The concept of Public Interest Litigation (PIL) originated and developed in the USA in the 1960s. In the USA, it was designed to provide legal representation to previously unrepresented groups and interests. It was undertaken in recognition of the fact that the ordinary marketplace for legal services fails to provide such services to significant segments of the population and to significant interests. Such groups and interests include the poor, environmentalists, consumers, racial and ethnic minorities, and others.
In India, the PIL is a product of the judicial activism role of the Supreme Court. It was introduced in the early 1980s. Justice V.R. Krishna Iyer and Justice P.N. Bhagwati were the pioneers of the concept of PIL.
PIL is also known variously as Social Action Litigation (SAL), Social Interest Litigation (SIL) and Class Action Litigation (CAL).

MEANING OF Public Interest Litigation (PIL):
The introduction of PIL in India was facilitated by the relaxation of the traditional rule of ‘locus standi’. According to this rule, only that person whose rights are infringed alone can move the court for the remedies, whereas, the PIL is an exception to this traditional rule. Under the PIL, any public-spirited citizen or a social organisation can move the court for the enforcement of the rights of any person or group of persons who because of their poverty or ignorance or socially or economically disadvantaged position are themselves unable to approach the court for the remedies. Thus, in a PIL, any member of the public having ‘sufficient interest’ can approach the court for enforcing the rights of other persons and redressal of a common grievance.
The Supreme Court has defined the PIL as “a legal action initiated in a court of law for the enforcement of public interest or general interest in which the public or a class of the community have pecuniary interest or some interest by which their legal rights or liabilities are affected.”
PIL is absolutely necessary for maintaining the rule of law, furthering the cause of justice and accelerating the pace of realisation of the constitutional objectives. In other words, the real purposes of PIL are:
(i) vindication of the rule of law,
(ii) facilitating effective access to justice to the socially and economically weaker sections of the society, and
(iii) meaningful realisation of the fundamental rights.

FEATURES OF Public Interest Litigation (PIL):
The various features of the PIL are explained below:
1. PIL is a strategic arm of the legal aid movement and is intended to bring justice within the reach of the poor masses, who constitute the low visibility area of humanity. 
2. PIL is a totally different kind of litigation from the ordinary traditional litigation which is essentially of an adversary character where there is a dispute between two litigating parties, one making claims seeking relief against the other and that other opposing such claim or resisting such relief. 
3. PIL is brought before the Court not for the purpose of enforcing the right of one individual against another as happens in the case of ordinary litigation, but it is intended to promote and vindicate public interest. 
4. PIL demands that violations of constitutional and legal rights of large numbers of people who are poor, ignorant or in a socially or economically disadvantaged position should not go unnoticed and unredressed. 
5. PIL is essentially a co-operative effort on the part of the petitioner, the State or Public Authority, and the Court to secure observance of the constitutional or legal rights, benefits and privileges conferred upon the vulnerable sections of the community and to reach social justice to them. 
6. In PIL, litigation is undertaken for the purpose of redressing public injury, enforcing public duty, protecting social, collective, diffused rights and interests or vindicating public interest. 
7. In PIL, the role held by the Court is more assertive than in traditional actions; it is creative rather than passive and it assumes a more positive attitude in determining acts. 
8. Though in PIL court enjoys a degree of flexibility unknown to the trial of traditional private law litigations, whatever the procedure adopted by the court it must be procedure known to judicial tenets and characteristics of a judicial proceeding. 
9. In a PIL, unlike traditional dispute resolution mechanism, there is no determination on adjudication of individual rights.

SCOPE OF Public Interest Litigation (PIL):
In 1998, the Supreme Court formulated a set of guidelines to be followed for entertaining letters or petitions received by it as PIL. These guidelines were modified in 1993 and 2003. According to them, the letters or petitions falling under the following categories alone will ordinarily be entertained as PIL:
1. Bonded labour matters
2. Neglected children
3. Non-payment of minimum wages to workers and exploitation of casual workers and complaints of violation of Labour Laws (except in individual cases)
4. Petitions from jails complaining of harassment, for premature release and seeking release after having completed 14 years in jail, death in jail, transfer, release on personal bond, speedy trial as a fundamental right 
5. Petitions against police for refusing to register a case, harassment by police and death in police custody 
6. Petitions against atrocities on women, in particular harassment of bride, brideburning, rape, murder, kidnapping, etc. 
7. Petitions complaining of harassment or torture of villagers by co-villagers or by police from persons belonging to Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribes and economically backward classes 
8. Petitions pertaining to environmental pollution, disturbance of ecological balance, drugs, food adulteration, maintenance of heritage and culture, antiques, forest and wild life and other matters of public importance
9. Petitions from riot-victims
10. Family pension
The cases falling under the following categories will not be entertained as PIL:
1. Landlord-tenant matters
2. Service matter and those pertaining to pension and gratuity
3. Complaints against Central/ State Government departments and Local Bodies except those relating to item numbers (1) to (10) above
4. Admission to medical and other educational institution
5. Petitions for early hearing of cases pending in High Courts and Subordinate Courts

PRINCIPLES OF Public Interest Litigation (PIL):
The Supreme Court evolved the following principles in regard to PIL:
1. The Court in exercise of powers under Articles 32 and 226 of the Constitution can entertain a petition filed by any interested person in the welfare of the people who are in a disadvantaged position and thus not in a position to knock the doors of the Court. The Court is constitutionally bound to protect the Fundamental Rights of such disadvantaged people and direct the State to fulfil its constitutional promises. 
2. When the issues of public importance, enforcement of the fundamental rights of large number of people vis-a-vis the constitutional duties and functions of the State are raised, the court treat a letter or a telegram as a PIL. In such cases, the court relaxes the procedural laws and also the law relating to pleadings. 
3. Whenever injustice is meted out to a large number of people, the court will not hesitate to step in to invoke Articles 14 and 21 of the Constitution of India as well as the International Conventions on Human Rights which provide for a reasonable and fair trial. 
4. The common rule of locus standi is relaxed so as to enable the court to look into the grievances complained on behalf of the poor, deprived, illiterate and the disabled who cannot vindicate the legal wrong or legal injury caused to them for violation of any constitutional or legal right. 
5. When the Court is prima facie satisfied about violation of any constitutional right of a group of people belonging to the disadvantaged category, it may not allow the State or the Government from raising the question as to the maintainability of the petition. 
6. Although procedural laws apply on PIL cases, the question as to whether the principles of res judicata4 or principles analogous thereto would apply depend on the nature of the petition and also facts and circumstances of the case. 
7. The dispute between two warring groups purely in the realm of private law would not be allowed to be agitated as a PIL. 
8. However, in an appropriate case, although the petitioner might have moved a Court in his private interest and for redressal of the personal grievances, the Court in furtherance of the public interest may treat it necessary to enquire into the state of affairs of the subject of litigation in the interest of justice. 
9. The Court in special situations may appoint Commission or other bodies for the purpose of investigating into the allegations and finding out facts. It may also direct management of a public institution taken over by such Commission. 
10. The Court will not ordinarily transgress into a policy. It shall also take utmost care not to transgress its jurisdiction while purporting to protect the rights of the people from being violated. 
11. The Court would ordinarily not step out of the known areas of judicial review. The High Court although may pass an order for doing complete justice to the parties, it does not have a power akin to Article 142 of the Constitution of India. 
12. Ordinarily the High Court should not entertain a writ petition by way of PIL questioning constitutionality or validity of a statute or a statutory rule.

GUIDELINES FOR ADMITTING Public Interest Litigation (PIL):
The PIL has now come to occupy an important field in the administration of law. It should not be allowed to become ‘Publicity Interest Litigation’ or ‘Politics Interest Litigation’ or ‘Private Interest Litigation’ or ‘Paisa Interest Litigation’ or ‘Middle-class Interest Litigation’ (MIL).
The Supreme Court, in this context, observed: “PIL is not a pill or a panacea for all wrongs. It was essentially meant to protect basic human rights of the weak and the disadvantaged and was a procedure which was innovated where a public-spirited person files a petition in effect on behalf of such persons who on account of poverty, helplessness or economic and social disabilities could not approach the court for relief. There have been, in recent times increasingly instances of abuse of PIL. Therefore, there is a need to re-emphasise the parameters within which PIL can be resorted to by a petitioner and entertained by the court.”
Therefore, the Supreme Court laid down the following guidelines for checking the misuse of the PIL:
1. The court must encourage genuine and bona fide PIL and effectively discourage and curb the PIL field for extraneous considerations. 
2. Instead of every individual Judge devising his own procedure for dealing with PIL, it would be appropriate for each High Court to properly formulate rules for encouraging the genuine PIL filed and discouraging PIL filed with oblique motives. 
3. The Court should prima facie verify the credentials of the petitioner before entertaining the PIL. 
4. The Court shall be prima facie satisfied regarding the correctness of the contents of petition before entertaining the PIL. 
5. The Court should be fully satisfied that substantial public interest is involved before entertaining the petition. 
6. The Court should ensure that the petition which involves larger public interest, gravity and urgency must be given priority over other petitions. 
7. The Court before entertaining the PIL must ensure that the PIL is aimed at redressal of genuine public harm and public injury. The Court should also ensure that there is no personal gain, private motive or oblique motive behind filing PIL. 
8. The Court should also ensure that the petition filed by busybodies for extraneous and ulterior motives must be discouraged by imposing exemplary costs or adopting similar novel methods to curb frivolous petitions and the petitions filed for extraneous considerations.

Governor:
The Constitution of India envisages the same pattern of government in the states as that for the Centre, that is, a parliamentary system. Part VI of the Constitution deals with the government in the states. Articles 153 to 167 in Part VI of the Constitution deal with the state executive. The state executive consists of the governor, the chief minister, the council of ministers and the advocate general of the state. Thus, there is no office of vice-governor (in the state) like that of Vice-President at the Centre.
The governor is the chief executive head of the state. But, like the president, he is a nominal executive head (titular or constitutional head). The governor also acts as an agent of the central government. Therefore, the office of governor has a dual role.
Usually, there is a governor for each state, but the 7th Constitutional Amendment Act of 1956 facilitated the appointment of the same person as a governor for two or more states.

APPOINTMENT OF GOVERNOR:
The governor is neither directly elected by the people nor indirectly elected by a specially constituted electoral college as is the case with the president. He is appointed by the president by warrant under his hand and seal. In a way, he is a nominee of the Central government. But, as held by the Supreme Court in 1979, the office of governor of a state is not an employment under the Central government. It is an independent constitutional office and is not under the control of or subordinate to the Central government.
The Draft Constitution provided for the direct election of the governor on the basis of universal adult suffrage. But the Constituent Assembly opted for the present system of appointment of governor by the president because of the following reasons:
1. The direct election of the governor is incompatible with the parliamentary system established in the states. 
2. The mode of direct election is more likely to create conflicts between the governor and the chief minister. 
3. The governor being only a constitutional (nominal) head, there is no point in making elaborate arrangements for his election and spending huge amount of money. 
4. The election of a governor would be entirely on personal issues. Hence, it is not in the national interest to involve a large number of voters in such an election. 
5. An elected governor would naturally belong to a party and would not be a neutral person and an impartial head.
6. The election of governor would create separatist tendencies and thus affect the political stability and unity of the country. 
7. The system of presidential nomination enables the Centre to maintain its control over the states. 
8. The direct election of the governor creates a serious problem of leadership at the time of a general election in the state. 9. The chief minister would like his nominee to contest for governorship. Hence, a second rate man of the ruling party is elected as governor.
Therefore, the American model, where the Governor of a state is directly elected, was dropped and the Canadian model, where the governor of a province (state) is appointed by the Governor-General (Centre), was accepted in the Constituent Assembly.
The Constitution lays down only two qualifications for the appointment of a person as a governor. These are:
1. He should be a citizen of India.
2. He should have completed the age of 35 years.
Additionally, two conventions have also developed in this regard over the years. First, he should be an outsider, that is, he should not belong to the state where he is appointed, so that he is free from the local politics. Second, while appointing the governor, the president is required to consult the chief minister of the state concerned, so that the smooth functioning of the constitutional machinery in the state is ensured. However, both the conventions have been violated in some of the cases. 

CONDITIONS OF GOVERNOR’S OFFICE:
The Constitution lays down the following conditions for the the governor’s office:
1. He should not be a member of either House of Parliament or a House of the state legislature. If any such person is appointed as governor, he is deemed to have vacated his seat in that House on the date on which he enters upon his office as the governor. 2. He should not hold any other office of profit. 3. He is entitled without payment of rent to the use of his official residence (the Raj Bhavan). 4. He is entitled to such emoluments, allowances and privileges as may be determined by Parliament. 5. When the same person is appointed as the governor of two or more states, the emoluments and allowances payable to him are shared by the states in such proportion as determined by the president. 6. His emoluments and allowances cannot be diminished during his term of office. 
In 2018, the Parliament has increased the salary of the governor from Rs. 1.10 lakh to Rs. 3.50 lakh per month.
Like the President, the governor is also entitled to a number of privileges and immunities. He enjoys personal immunity from legal liability for his official acts. During his term of office, he is immune from any criminal proceedings, even in respect of his personal acts. He cannot be arrested or imprisoned. However, after giving two months’ notice, civil proceedings can be instituted against him during his term of office in respect of his personal acts.
Before entering upon his office, the governor has to make and subscribe to an oath or affirmation. In his oath, the governor swears:
(a) to faithfully execute the office;
(b) to preserve, protect and defend the Constitution and the law; and
(c) to devote himself to the service and well-being of the people of the state.
The oath of office to the governor is administered by the chief justice of the concerned state high court and in his absence, the senior-most judge of that court available.
Every person discharging the functions of the governor also undertakes the similar oath or affirmation.

TERM OF GOVERNOR’S OFFICE:
A governor holds office for a term of five years from the date on which he enters upon his office. However, this term of five years is subject to the pleasure of the President. Further, he can resign at any time by addressing a resignation letter to the President.
The Supreme Court held that the pleasure of the President is not justifiable. The governor has no security of tenure and no fixed term of office. He may be removed by the President at any time. The Constitution does not lay down any grounds upon which a governor may be removed by the President. Hence, the National Front Government headed by V.P. Singh (1989) asked all the governors to resign as they were appointed by the Congress government. Eventually, some of the governors were replaced and some were allowed to continue. The same thing was repeated in 1991, when the Congress Government headed by P.V. Narasimha Rao changed fourteen governors appointed by the V.P. Singh and Chandra Sekhar governments.
The President may transfer a Governor appointed to one state to another state for the rest of the term. Further, a Governor whose term has expired may be reappointed in the same state or any other state. A governor can hold office beyond his term of five years until his successor assumes charge. The underlying idea is that there must be a governor in the state and there cannot be an interregnum.
The President can make such provision as he thinks fit for the discharge of the functions of the governor in any contingency not provided for in the Constitution, for example, the death of a sitting governor. Thus, the chief justice of the concerned state high court may be appointed temporarily to discharge the functions of the governor of that state.

POWERS AND FUNCTIONS OF GOVERNOR:
A governor possesses executive, legislative, financial and judicial powers more or less analogous to the President of India. However, he has no diplomatic, military or emergency powers like the president. The powers and functions of the governor can be studied under the following heads:
1. Executive powers.
2. Legislative powers.
3. Financial powers.
4. Judicial powers.

Executive Powers of the Governor:
The executive powers and functions of the Governor are:
1. All executive actions of the government of a state are formally taken in his name.
2. He can make rules specifying the manner in which the Orders and other instruments made and executed in his name shall be authenticated.
3. He can make rules for more convenient transaction of the business of a state government and for the allocation among the ministers of the said business.
4. He appoints the chief minister and other ministers. They also hold office during his pleasure. There should be a Tribal Welfare minister in the states of Chattisgarh, Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh and Odisha appointed by him. The state of Bihar was excluded from this provision by the 94th Amendment Act of 2006. 
5. He appoints the advocate general of a state and determines his remuneration. The advocate general holds office during the pleasure of the governor. 
6. He appoints the state election commissioner and determines his conditions of service and tenure of office. However, the state election commissioner can be removed only in like manner and on the like grounds as a judge of a high court. 
7. He appoints the chairman and members of the state public service commission. However, they can be removed only by the president and not by a governor. 
8. He can seek any information relating to the administration of the affairs of the state and proposals for legislation from the chief minister. 
9. He can require the chief minister to submit for the consideration of the council of ministers any matter on which a decision has been taken by a minister but which has not been considered by the council. 10. He can recommend the imposition of constitutional emergency in a state to the president. During the period of President’s rule in a state, the governor enjoys extensive executive powers as an agent of the President. 
11. He acts as the chancellor of universities in the state. He also appoints the vicechancellors of universities in the state.

Legislative Powers of the Governor:
A governor is an integral part of the state legislature. In that capacity, he has the following legislative powers and functions:
1. He can summon or prorogue the state legislature and dissolve the state legislative assembly. 
2. He can address the state legislature at the commencement of the first session after each general election and the first session of each year. 
3. He can send messages to the house or houses of the state legislature, with respect to a bill pending in the legislature or otherwise. 
4. He can appoint any member of the State legislative assembly to preside over its proceedings when the offices of both the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker fall vacant. Similarly, he can appoint any member of the state legislature council to preside over its proceedings when the offices of both Chairman and Deputy Chairman fall vacant. 
5. He nominates one-sixth of the members of the state legislative council from amongst persons having special knowledge or practical experience in literature, science, art, cooperative movement and social service. 
6. He can nominate one member to the state legislature assembly from the Anglo-Indian Community. 
7. He decides on the question of disqualification of members of the state legislature in consultation with the Election Commission. 
8. When a bill is sent to the governor after it is passed by state legislature, he can:
(a) Give his assent to the bill, or
(b) Withhold his assent to the bill, or
(c) Return the bill (if it is not a money bill) for reconsideration of the state legislature. However, if the bill is passed again by the state legislature with or without amendments, the governor has to give his assent to the bill, or 
(d) Reserve the bill for the consideration of the president. In one case such reservation is obligatory, that is, where the bill passed by the state legislature endangers the position of the state high court. In addition, the governor can also reserve the bill if it is of the following nature:
(i) Ultra-vires, that is, against the provisions of the Constitution.
(ii) Opposed to the Directive Principles of State Policy.
(iii) Against the larger interest of the country.
(iv) Of grave national importance.
(v) Dealing with compulsory acquisition of property under Article the Constitution.
9. He can promulgate ordinances when the state legislature is not in session. These ordinances must be approved by the state legislature within six weeks from its reassembly. He can also withdraw an ordinance anytime. This is the most important legislative power of the governor. 
10. He lays the reports of the State Finance Commission, the State Public Service Commission and the Comptroller and AuditorGeneral relating to the accounts of the state, before the state legislature.

Financial Powers of the Governor::
The financial powers and functions of the governor are:
1. He sees that the Annual Financial Statement (state budget) is laid before the state legislature. 
2. Money bills can be introduced in the state legislature only with his prior recommendation. 
3. No demand for a grant can be made except on his recommendation. 
4. He can make advances out of the Contingency Fund of the state to meet any unforeseen expenditure. 
5. He constitutes a finance commission after every five years to review the financial position of the panchayats and the municipalities.

Judicial Powers of the Governor:
The judicial powers and functions of the governor are:
1. Governor can grant pardons, reprives, respites and remissions of punishment or suspend, remit and commute the sentence of any person convicted of any offence against any law relating to a matter to which the executive power of the state extends. 
2. Governor is consulted by the president while appointing the judges of the concerned state high court. 
3. Governor makes appointments, postings and promotions of the district judges in consultation with the state high court. 
4. Governor also appoints persons to the judicial service of the state (other than district judges) in consultation with the state high court and the State Public Service Commission.

CONSTITUTIONAL POSITION OF GOVERNOR:
The Constitution of India provides for a parliamentary form of government in the states as in the Centre. Consequently, the governor has been made only a nominal executive, the real executive constitutes the council of ministers headed by the chief minister. In other words, the governor has to exercise his powers and functions with the aid and advise of the council of ministers headed by the chief minister, except in matters in which he is required to act in his discretion (i.e., without the advice of ministers). In estimating the constitutional position of the governor, particular reference has to be made to the provisions of Articles 154, 163 and 164. These are:
(a) The executive power of the state shall be vested in the governor and shall be exercised by him either directly or through officers subordinate to him in accordance with this Constitution (Article 154). 
(b) There shall be a council of ministers with the chief minister as the head to aid and advise the governor in the exercise of his functions, except in so far as he is required to exercise his functions in his discretion (Article 163). 
(c) The council of ministers shall be collectively responsible to the legislative assembly of the state (Article 164). This provision is the foundation of the parliamentary system of government in the state.
From the above, it is clear that constitutional position of the governor
differs from that of the president in the following two respects:
1. While the Constitution envisages the possibility of the governor acting at times in his discretion, no such possibility has been envisaged for the President. 2. After the 42nd Constitutional Amendment (1976), ministerial advice has been made binding on the President, but no such provision has been made with respect to the governor.
The Constitution makes it clear that if any question arises whether a matter falls within the governor’s discretion or not, the decision of the governor is final and the validity of anything done by him cannot be called in question on the ground that he ought or ought not to have acted in his discretion. The governor has constitutional discretion in the following cases:
1. Reservation of a bill for the consideration of the President.
2. Recommendation for the imposition of the President’s Rule in the state.
3. While exercising his functions as the administrator of an adjoining union territory (in case of additional charge).
4. Determining the amount payable by the Government of Assam, Meghalaya, Tripura and Mizoram to an autonomous Tribal District Council as royalty accruing from licenses for mineral exploration.
5. Seeking information from the chief minister with regard to the administrative and legislative matters of the state. 
In addition to the above constitutional discretion (i.e., the express discretion mentioned in the Constitution), the governor, like the president, also has situational discretion (i.e., the hidden discretion derived from the exigencies of a prevailing political situation) in the following cases:
1. Appointment of chief minister when no party has a clear-cut majority in the state legislative assembly or when the chief minister in office dies suddenly and there is no obvious successor.
2. Dismissal of the council of ministers when it cannot prove the confidence of the state legislative assembly.
3. Dissolution of the state legislative assembly if the council of ministers has lost its majority.
Moreover, the governor has certain special responsibilities to discharge according to the directions issued by the President. In this regard, the governor, though has to consult the council of ministers led by the chief minister, acts finally on his discretion. They are as follows:
1. Maharashtra–Establishment of separate development boards for Vidarbha and Marathwada.
2. Gujarat–Establishment of separate development boards for Saurashtra and Kutch. 
3. Nagaland–With respect to law and order in the state for so long as the internal disturbance in the Naga Hills-TUensang Area continues. 
4. Assam–With respect to the administration of tribal areas. 
5. Manipur–Regarding the administration of the hill areas in the state. 
6. Sikkim–For peace and for ensuring social and economic advancement of the different sections of the population. 
7. Arunachal Pradesh–With respect to law and order in the state. 
8. Karnataka - Establishment of a separate development board for Hyderabad-Karnataka region.
Thus, the Constitution has assigned a dual role to the office of a governor in the Indian federal system. He is the constitutional head of the state as well as the representative of the Centre (i.e., President).

Chief Minister:
In the scheme of parliamentary system of government provided by the Constitution, the governor is the nominal executive authority (de jure executive) and the Chief Minister is the real executive authority (de facto executive). In other words, the governor is the head of the state while the Chief Minister is the head of the government. Thus the position of the Chief Minister at the state level is analogous to the position of prime minister at the Centre.

APPOINTMENT OF CHIEF MINISTER:
The Constitution does not contain any specific procedure for the selection and appointment of the Chief Minister. Article 164 only says that the Chief Minister shall be appointed by the governor. However, this does not imply that the governor is free to appoint any one as the Chief Minister. In accordance with the conventions of the parliamentary system of government, the governor has to appoint the leader of the majority party in the state legislative assembly as the Chief Minister. But, when no party has a clear majority in the assembly, then the governor may exercise his personal discretion in the selection and appointment of the Chief Minister. In such a situation, the governor usually appoints the leader of the largest party or coalition in the assembly as the Chief Minister and ask him to seek a vote of confidence in the House within a month.
The governor may have to exercise his individual judgement in the selection and appointed of the Chief Minister when the Chief Minister in office dies suddenly and there is no obvious successor. However, on the death of a Chief Minister, the ruling party usually elects a new leader and the governor has no choice but to appoint him as Chief Minister.
The Constitution does not require that a person must prove his majority in the legislative assembly before he is appointed as the Chief Minister. The governor may first appoint him as the Chief Minister and then ask him to prove his majority in the legislative assembly within a reasonable period. This is what has been done in a number of cases.
A person who is not a member of the state legislature can be appointed as Chief Minister for six months, within which time, he should be elected to the state legislature, failing which he ceases to be the Chief Minister.
According to the Constitution, the Chief Minister may be a member of any of the two Houses of a state legislature. Usually Chief Ministers have been selected from the Lower House (legislative assembly), but, on a number of occasions, a member of the Upper House (legislative council) has also been appointed as Chief Minister.

OATH, TERM AND SALARY:
Before the Chief Minister enters his office, the governor administers to him the oaths of office and secrecy. In his oath of office, the Chief Minister swears:
1. to bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of India,
2. to uphold the sovereignty and integrity of India,
3. to faithfully and conscientiously discharge the duties of his office, and
4. to do right to all manner of people in accordance with the Constitution and the law, without fear or favour, affection or illwill.
In his oath of secrecy, the Chief Minister swears that he will not directly or indirectly communicate or reveal to any person(s) any matter that is brought under his consideration or becomes known to him as a state minister except as may be required for the due discharge of his duties as such minister.
The term of the Chief Minister is not fixed and he holds office during the pleasure of the governor. However, this does not mean that the governor can dismiss him at any time. He cannot be dismissed by the governor as long as he enjoys the majority support in the legislative assembly. But, if he loses the confidence of the assembly, he must resign or the governor can dismiss him.
The salary and allowances of the Chief Minister are determined by the state legislature. In addition to the salary and allowances, which are payable to a member of the state legislature, he gets a sumptuary allowance, free accommodation, travelling allowance, medical facilities, etc.

POWERS AND FUNCTIONS OF CHIEF MINISTER:
The powers and functions of the Chief Minister can be studied under the following heads:
In Relation to Council of Ministers:
The Chief Minister enjoys the following powers as head of the state council of ministers:
(a) The governor appoints only those persons as ministers who are recommended by the Chief Minister. 
(b) He allocates and reshuffles the portfolios among ministers. 
(c) He can ask a minister to resign or advise the governor to dismiss him in case of difference of opinion. 
(d) He presides over the meetings of the council of ministers and influences its decisions. 
(e) He guides, directs, controls and coordinates the activities of all the ministers. 
(f) He can bring about the collapse of the council of ministers by resigning from office. Since the Chief Minister is the head of the council of ministers, his resignation or death automatically dissolves the council of ministers. The resignation or death of any other minister, on the other hand, merely creates a vacancy, which the Chief Minister may or may not like to fill.

In Relation to the Governor:
The Chief Minister enjoys the following powers in relation to the governor:
(a) He is the principal channel of communication between the governor and the council of ministers. It is the duty of the Chief Minister: 
(i) to communicate to the Governor of the state all decisions of the council of ministers relating to the administration of the affairs the state and proposals for legislation; 
(ii) to furnish such information relating to the administration of the affairs of the state and proposals for legislation as the govern may call for; and 
(iii) if the governor so requires, to submit for the consideration of the council of ministers any matter on which a decision has be taken by a minister but which has not been considered by the council. 
(b) He advises the governor with regard to the appointment of important officials like advocate general, chairman and members of the state public service commission, state election commissioner, and so on.

In Relation to State Legislature:
The Chief Minister enjoys the following powers as the leader of the house:
(a) He advises the governor with regard to the summoning and proroguing of the sessions of the state legislature.
(b) He can recommend the dissolution of the legislative assembly to the governor at any time.
(c) He announces the government policies on the floor of the house.

Other Powers and Functions:
In addition, the Chief Minister also performs the following functions:
(a) He is the chairman of the State Planning Board. 
(b) He acts as a vice-chairman of the concerned zonal council by rotation, holding office for a period of one year at a time. 
(c) He is a member of the Inter-State Council and the Governing Council of NITI Aayog, both headed by the prime minister. 
(d) He is the chief spokesman of the state government. 
(e) He is the crisis manager-in-chief at the political level during emergencies. 
(f) As a leader of the state, he meets various sections of the people and receives memoranda from them regarding their problems, and so on. 
(g) He is the political head of the services.
Thus, the Chief Minister plays a very significant and highly crucial role in the state administration. However, the discretionary powers enjoyed by the governor reduces to some extent the power, authority, influence, prestige and role of the Chief Minister in the state administration.

RELATIONSHIP WITH THE GOVERNOR:
The following provisions of the Constitution deal with the relationship between the governor and the Chief Minister:
1. Article 163: There shall be a council of ministers with the Chief Minister as the head to aid and advise the governor on the exercise of his functions, except in so far as he is required to exercise his functions or any of them in his discretion.
2. Article 164:
(a) The Chief Minister shall be appointed by the governor and other ministers shall be appointed by the governor on the advise of the Chief Minister; 
(b) The ministers shall hold office during the pleasure of the governor; and 
(c) The council of ministers shall be collectively responsible to the legislative assembly of the state. 
3. Article 167: It shall be the duty of the Chief Minister: 
(a) to communicate to the governor of the state all decisions of the council of ministers relating to the administration of the affairs of the state and proposals for legislation; 
(b) to furnish such information relating to the administration of the affairs of the state and proposals for legislation as the governor may call for; and 
(c) if the governor so requires, to submit for the consideration of the council of ministers any matter on which a decision has been taken by a minister but which has not been considered by the council.

State Council of Ministers:
As the Constitution of India provides for a parliamentary system of government in the states on the Union pattern, the council of ministers headed by the chief minister is the real executive authority in the politico-administrative system of a state. The council of ministers in the states is constituted and function in the same way as the council of ministers at the Centre. The principles of parliamentary system of government are not detailed in the Constitution; but two Articles (163 and 164) deal with them in a broad, sketchy and general manner. Article 163 deals with the status of the council of ministers while Article 164 deals with the appointment, tenure, responsibility, qualifications, oath and salaries and allowances of the ministers. 

CONSTITUTIONAL PROVISIONS:
Article 163–Council of Ministers to aid and advise Governor
1. There shall be a Council of Ministers with the Chief Minister as the head to aid and advise the Governor in the exercise of his functions, except in so far as he is required to exercise his functions in his discretion. 
2. If any question arises whether a matter falls within the Governor’s discretion or not, decision of the Governor shall be final, and the validity of anything done by the Governor shall not be called in question on the ground that he ought or ought not to have acted in his discretion. 
3. The advice tendered by Ministers to the Governor shall not be inquired into in any court.

Article 164–Other Provisions as to Ministers:
1. The Chief Minister shall be appointed by the Governor and the other Ministers shall be appointed by the Governor on the advice of the Chief Minister. However, in the states of Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh and Odisha, there shall be a Minister in charge of tribal welfare who may in addition be in charge of the welfare of the scheduled castes and backward classes or any other work. The state of Bihar was excluded from this provision by the 94th Amendment Act of 2006. 
2. The total number of ministers, including the chief minister, in the council of ministers in a state shall not exceed 15 per cent of the total strength of the legislative assembly of that state. But, the number of ministers, including the chief minister, in a state shall not be less than 12. This provision was added by the 91st Amendment Act of 2003. 
3. A member of either House of state legislature belonging to any political party who is disqualified on the ground of defection shall also be disqualified to be appointed as a minister. This provision was also added by the 91st Amendment Act of 2003. 
4. The ministers shall hold office during the pleasure of the Governor. 
5. The council of ministers shall be collectively responsible to the state Legislative Assembly. 
6. The Governor shall administer the oaths of office and secrecy to a minister. 
7. A minister who is not a member of the state legislature for any period of six consecutive months shall cease to be a minister. 8. The salaries and allowances of ministers shall be determined by the state legislature.

Article 166–Conduct of Business of the Government of a State:
1. All executive action of the Government of a State shall be expressed to be taken in the name of the Governor. 
2. Orders and other instruments made and executed in the name of the Governor shall be authenticated in such manner as may be specified in rules to be made by the Governor. Further, the validity of an order or instrument which is so authenticated shall not be called in question on the ground that it is not an order or instrument made or executed by the Governor. 
3. The Governor shall make rules for the more convenient transaction of the business of the government of the state, and for the allocation among ministers of the said business in so far as it is not business with respect to which the Governor is required to act in his discretion.

Article 167–Duties of Chief Minister:
It shall be the duty of the Chief Minister of each state:
1. To communicate to the governor of the state all decisions of the council of ministers relating to the administration of the affairs of the state and proposals for legislation 
2. To furnish such information relating to the administration of the affairs of the state and proposals for legislation as the governor may call for 
3. If the governor so requires, to submit for the consideration of the council of ministers any matter on which a decision has been taken by a minister but which has not been considered by the council

Article 177–Rights of Ministers as Respects the Houses:
Every minister shall have the right to speak and take part in the proceedings of the Assembly (and also the Council where it exists) and any Committee of the State Legislature of which he may be named a member. But he shall not be entitled to vote.

NATURE OF ADVICE BY MINISTERS:
Article 163 provides for a council of ministers with the chief minister at the head to aid and advise the governor in the exercise of his functions except the discretionary ones. If any question arises whether a matter falls within the governor’s discretion or not, the decision of the governor is final and the validity of anything done by him cannot be called in question on the ground that he ought or ought not to have acted in his discretion. Further, the nature of advice tendered by ministers to the governor cannot be enquired by any court. This provision emphasises the intimate and the confidential relationship between the governor and the ministers.
In 1971, the Supreme Court ruled that a council of ministers must always exist to advise the governor, even after the dissolution of the state legislative assembly or resignation of a council of ministers. Hence, the existing ministry may continue in the office until its successor assumes charge. Again in 1974, the Court clarified that except in spheres where the governor is to act in his discretion, the governor has to act on the aid and advice of the council of ministers in the exercise of his powers and functions. He is not required to act personally without the aid and advice of the council of ministers or against the aid and advice of the council of ministers. Wherever the Constitution requires the satisfaction of the governor, the satisfaction is not the personal satisfaction of the governor but it is the satisfaction of the council of ministers.

APPOINTMENT OF MINISTERS:
The chief minister is appointed by the governor. The other ministers are appointed by the governor on the advice of the chief minister. This means that the governor can appoint only those persons as ministers who are recommended by the chief minister. But, there should be a tribal welfare minister in Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh and Odisha. Originally, this provision was applicable to Bihar, Madhya Pradesh and Odisha. The 94th Amendment Act of 2006 freed Bihar from the obligation of having a tribal welfare minister as there are no Scheduled Areas in Bihar now and the fraction of population of the Scheduled Tribes is very small. The same Amendment also extended the above provision to the newly formed states of Chhattisgarh and Jharkhand.
Usually, the members of the state legislature, either the legislative assembly or the legislative council, are appointed as ministers. A person who is not a member of either House of the state legislature can also be appointed as a minister. But, within six months, he must become a member (either by election or by nomination) of either House of the state legislature, otherwise, he ceases to be a minister.
A minister who is a member of one House of the state legislature has the right to speak and to take part in the proceedings of the other House. But, he can vote only in the House of which he is a member.

OATH AND SALARY OF MINISTERS:
Before a minister enters upon his office, the governor administers to him the oaths of office and secrecy. In his oath of office, the minister swears:
1. to bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of India,
2. to uphold the sovereignty and integrity of India,
3. to faithfully and conscientiously discharge the duties of his office, and
4. to do right to all manner of people in accordance with the Constitution and the law, without fear or favour, affection or ill-will.
In his oath of secrecy, the minister swears that he will not directly or indirectly communicate or reveal to any person(s) any matter that is brought under his consideration or becomes known to him as a state minister except as may be required for the due discharge of his duties as such minister.
The salaries and allowances of ministers are determined by the state legislature from time to time. A minister gets the salary and allowances which are payable to a member of the state legislature. Additionally, he gets a sumptuary allowance (according to his rank), free accommodation, travelling allowance, medical facilities, etc.

RESPONSIBILITY OF MINISTERS:
Collective Responsibility:
The fundamental principle underlying the working of parliamentary system of government is the principle of collective responsibility. Article 164 clearly states that the council of ministers is collectively responsible to the legislative assembly of the state. This means that all the ministers own joint responsibility to the legislative assembly for all their acts of omission and commission. They work as a team and swim or sink together. When the legislative assembly passes a no-confidence motion against the council of ministers, all the ministers have to resign including those ministers who are from the legislative council. Alternatively, the council of ministers can advice the governor to dissolve the legislative assembly on the ground that the House does not represent the views of the electorate faithfully and call for fresh elections. The governor may not oblige the council of ministers which has lost the confidence of the legislative assembly.
The principle of collective responsibility also mean that the cabinet decisions bind all cabinet ministers (and other ministers) even if they deferred in the cabinet meeting. It is the duty of every minister to stand by the cabinet decisions and support them both within and outside the state legislature. If any minister disagrees with a cabinet decision and is not prepared to defend it, he must resign. Several ministers have resigned in the past owing to their differences with the cabinet.

Individual Responsibility:
Article 164 also contains the principle of individual responsibility. It states that the ministers hold office during the pleasure of the governor. This means that the governor can remove a minister at a time when the council of ministers enjoys the confidence of the legislative assembly. But, the governor can remove a minister only on the advice of the chief minister. In case of difference of opinion or dissatisfaction with the performance of a minister, the chief minister can ask him to resign or advice the governor to dismiss him. By exercising this power, the chief minister can ensure the realisation of the rule of collective responsibility.

No Legal Responsibility:
As at the Centre, there is no provision in the Constitution for the system of legal responsibility of the minister in the states. It is not required that an order of the governor for a public act should be countersigned by a minister. Moreover, the courts are barred from enquiring into the nature of advice rendered by the ministers to the governor.

COMPOSITION OF THE COUNCIL OF MINISTERS:
The Constitution does not specify the size of the state council of ministers or the ranking of ministers. They are determined by the chief minister according to the exigencies of the time and requirements of the situation.
Like at the Centre, in the states too, the council of ministers consists of three categories of ministers, namely, cabinet ministers, ministers of state, and deputy ministers. The difference between them lies in their respective ranks, emoluments, and political importance. At the top of all these ministers stands the chief minister–supreme governing authority in the state.
The cabinet ministers head the important departments of the state government like home, education, finance, agriculture and so forth. They are members of the cabinet, attend its meetings and play an important role in deciding policies. Thus, their responsibilities extend over the entire gamut of state government. The ministers of state can either be given independent charge of departments or can be attached to cabinet ministers. However, they are not members of the cabinet and do not attend the cabinet meetings unless specially invited when something related to their departments are considered by the cabinet.
Next in rank are the deputy ministers. They are not given independent charge of departments. They are attached to the cabinet ministers and assist them in their administrative, political and parliamentary duties. They are not members of the cabinet and do not attend cabinet meetings.
At times, the council of ministers may also include a deputy chief minister. The deputy chief ministers are appointed mostly for local political reasons.

CABINET:
A smaller body called cabinet is the nucleus of the council of ministers. It consists of only the cabinet ministers. It is the real centre of authority in the state government. It performs the following role:
1. It is the highest decisionmaking authority in the politicoadministrative system of a state.
2. It is the chief policy formulating body of the state government.
3. It is the supreme executive authority of the state government.
4. It is the chief coordinator of state administration.
5. It is an advisory body to the governor.
6. It is the chief crisis manager and thus deals with all  emergency situations.
7. It deals with all major legislative and financial matters.
8. It exercises control over higher appointments like constitutional authorities and senior secretariat administrators.

Cabinet Committees:
The cabinet works through various committees called cabinet committees. They are of two types–standing and ad hoc. The former are of a permanent nature while the latter are of a temporary nature. They are set up by the chief minister according to the exigencies of the time and requirements of the situation. Hence, their number, nomenclature and composition varies from time to time. They not only sort out issues and formulate proposals for the consideration of the cabinet but also take decisions. However, the cabinet can review their decisions.

State Legislature:
The state legislature occupies a preeminent and central position in the political system of a state. Articles 168 to 212 in Part VI of the Constitution deal with the organisation, composition, duration, officers, procedures, privileges, powers and so on of the state legislature. Though these are similar to that of Parliament, there are some differences as well.

ORGANISATION OF STATE LEGISLATURE:
There is no uniformity in the organisation of state legislatures. Most of the states have an unicameral system, while others have a bicameral system. At present (2019), only six states have two Houses (bicameral). These are Andhra Pradesh, Telangana, Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, Maharashtra and Karnataka. The Jammu and Kashmir Legislative Council was abolishes by the Jammu and Kashmir Reorganisation Act, 2019.1 The Tamil Nadu Legislative Council Act, 2010 has not come into force. The Legislative Council in Andhra Pradesh was revived by the Andhra Pradesh Legislative Council Act, 2005. The 7th Amendment Act of 1956 provided for a Legislative Council in Madhya Pradesh. However, a notification to this effect has to be made by the President. So far, no such notification has been made. Hence, Madhya Pradesh continues to have one House only. The twenty-two states have unicameral system. Here, the state legislature consists of the governor and the legislative assembly. In the states having bicameral system, the state legislature consists of the governor, the legislative council and the legislative assembly. The legislative council (Vidhan Parishad) is the upper house (second chamber or house of elders), while the legislative assembly (Vidhan Sabha) is the lower house (first chamber or popular house).
The Constitution provides for the abolition or creation of legislative councils in states. Accordingly, the Parliament can abolish a legislative council (where it already exists) or create it (where it does not exist), if the legislative assembly of the concerned state passes a resolution to that effect. Such a specific resolution must be passed by the state assembly by a special majority, that is, a majority of the total membership of the assembly and a majority of not less than two-thirds of the members of the assembly present and voting. This Act of Parliament is not to be deemed as an amendment of the Constitution for the purposes of Article 368 and is passed like an ordinary piece of legislation (ie, by simple majority).
“The idea of having a second chamber in the states was criticised in the Constituent Assembly on the ground that it was not representative of the people, that it delayed legislative process and that it was an expensive institution.” Consequently the provision was made for the abolition or creation of a legislative council to enable a state to have a second chamber or not according to its own willingness and financial strength. For example, Andhra Pradesh got the legislative council created in 1957 and got the same abolished in 1985. The Legislative Council in Andhra Pradesh was again revived in 2007, after the enactment of the Andhra Pradesh Legislative Council Act, 2005. The legislative council of Tamil Nadu had been abolished in 1986 and that of Punjab and West Bengal in 1969.
In 2010, the Legislative Assembly of Tamil Nadu passed a resolution for the revival of the Legislative Council in the state. Accordingly, the Parliament enacted the Tamil Nadu Legislative Council Act, 2010 which provided for the creation of Legislative Council in the state. However, before this Act was enforced, the Legislative Assembly of Tamil Nadu passed another resolution in 2011 seeking the abolition of the proposed Legislative Council.

COMPOSITION OF TWO HOUSES:
Composition of Assembly Strength:
The legislative assembly consists of representatives directly elected by the people on the basis of universal adult franchise. Its maximum strength is fixed at 500 and minimum strength at 60. It means that its strength varies from 60 to 500 depending on the population size of the state3. However, in case of Arunachal Pradesh, Sikkim and Goa, the minimum number is fixed at 30 and in case of Mizoram and Nagaland, it is 40 and 46 respectively. Further, some members of the legislative assemblies in Sikkim and Nagaland are also elected indirectly.

Nominated Member:
The governor can nominate one member from the Anglo-Indian community, if the community is not adequately represented in the assembly. Originally, this provision was to operate for ten years (ie, upto 1960). But this duration has been extended continuously since then by 10 years each time. Now, under the 95th Amendment Act of 2009, this is to last until 2020.

Territorial Constituencies:
For the purpose of holding direct elections to the assembly, each state is divided into territorial constituencies. The demarcation of these constituencies is done in such a manner that the ratio between the population of each constituency and the number of seats allotted to it isthe same throughout the state. In other words, the Constitution ensures that there is uniformity of representation between different constituencies in the state. The expression ‘population’ means, the population as ascertained at the last preceding census of which the relevant figures have been published.

Readjustment after each census:
After each census, a readjustment is to be made in the 
(a) total number of seats in the assembly of each state and 
(b) the division of each state into territorial constituencies. The Parliament is empowered to determine the authority and the manner in which it is to be made. 
Accordingly, Parliament has enacted the Delimitation Commission Acts in 1952, 1962, 1972 and 2002 for this purpose.
The 42nd Amendment Act of 1976 had frozen total number of seats in the assembly of each state and the division of such state into territorial constituencies till the year 2000 at the 1971 level. This ban on readjustment has been extended for another years (i.e., upto year 2026) by the 84th Amendment Act of 2001 with the same objective of encouraging population limiting measures.
The 84th Amendment Act of 2001 also empowered the government to undertake readjustment and rationalisation of territorial constituencies in a state on the basis of the population figures of 1991 census. Later, the 87th Amendment Act of 2003 provided for the delimitation of constituencies on the basis of 2001 census and not 1991 census. However, this can be done without altering the total number of seats in the assembly of each state.

Reservation of seats for SCs and STs:
The Constitution provided for the reservation of seats for scheduled castes and scheduled tribes in the assembly of each state on the basis of population ratios.
Originally, this reservation was to operate for ten years (i.e., up to 1960).  But this duration has been extended continuously since then by 10 years each time. Now, under the 95th Amendment Act of 2009, this reservation is to last until 2020.

Composition of Council Strength:
Unlike the members of the legislative assembly, the members of the legislative council are indirectly elected. The maximum strength of the council is fixed at one-third of the total strength of the assembly and the minimum strength is fixed at 406. It means that the size of the council depends on the size of the assembly of the concerned state. This is done to ensure the predominance of the directly elected House (assembly) in the legislative affairs of the state. Though the Constitution has fixed the maximum and the minimum limits, the actual strength of a Council is fixed by Parliament.

Manner of Election:
Of the total number of members of a legislative council:
1. 1/3 are elected by the members of local bodies in the state like municipalities, district boards, etc., 
2. 1/12 are elected by graduates of three years standing and residing within the state, 
3. 1/12 are elected by teachers of three years standing in the state, not lower in standard than secondary school, 
4. 1/3 are elected by the members of the legislative assembly of the state from amongst persons who are not members of the assembly, and 
5. the remainder are nominated by the governor from amongst persons who have a special knowledge or practical experience of literature, science, art, cooperative movement and social service.
Thus, 5/6 of the total number of members of a legislative council are indirectly elected and 1/6 are nominated by the governor. The members are elected in accordance with the system of proportional representation by means of a single transferable vote. The bonafide or propriety of the governor’s nomination in any case cannot be challenged in the courts.
This scheme of composition of a legislative council as laid down in the Constitution is tentative and not final. The Parliament is authorised to modify or replace the same. However, it has not enacted any such law so far. 

DURATION OF TWO HOUSES:
Duration of Assembly:
Like the Lok Sabha, the legislative assembly is not a continuing chamber. Its normal term is five years from the date of its first meeting after the general elections. The expiration of the period of five years operates as automatic dissolution of the assembly. However, the governor is authorised to dissolve the assembly at any time (i.e., even before the completion of five years) to pave the way for fresh elections.
Further, the term of the assembly can be extended during the period of national emergency by a law of Parliament for one year at a time (for any length of time). However, this extension cannot continue beyond a period of six months after the emergency has ceased to operate. This means that the assembly should be re-elected within six months after the revocation of emergency.

Duration of Council:
Like the Rajya Sabha, the legislative council is a continuing chamber, that is, it is a permanent body and is not subject to dissolution. But, one-third of its members retire on the expiration of every second year. So, a member continues as such for six years. The vacant seats are filled up by fresh elections and nominations (by governor) at the beginning of every third year. The retiring members are also eligible for re-election and re-nomination any number of times.

MEMBERSHIP OF STATE LEGISLATURE:
1. Qualifications to be a member of the state legislature:
The Constitution lays down the following qualifications for a person to be chosen a member of the state legislature.
(a) He must be a citizen of India.
(b) He must make and subscribe to an oath or affirmation before the person authorised by the Election Commission for this purpose.
In his oath or affirmation, he swears
(i) To bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of India
(ii) To uphold the sovereignty and integrity of India
(c) He must be not less than 30 years of age in the case of the legislative council and not less than 25 years of age in the case of the legislative assembly.
(d) He must posses other qualifications prescribed by Parliament.

Accordingly, the Parliament has laid down the following additional qualifications in the Representation of People Act (1951):
(a) A person to be elected to the legislative council must be an elector for an assembly constituency in the concerned state and to be qualified for the governor’s nomination, he must be a resident in the concerned state. 
(b) A person to be elected to the legislative assembly must be an elector for an assembly constituency in the concerned state. 
(c) He must be a member of a scheduled caste or scheduled tribe if he wants to contest a seat reserved for them. However, a member of scheduled castes or scheduled tribes can also contest a seat not reserved for them.

2. Disqualifications:
Under the Constitution, a person shall be disqualified for being chosen as and for being a member of the legislative assembly or legislative council of a state:
(a) if he holds any office of profit under the Union or state government (except that of a minister or any other office exempted by state legislature), 
(b) if he is of unsound mind and stands so declared by a court, 
(c) if he is an undischarged insolvent, 
(d) if he is not a citizen of India or has voluntarily acquired the citizenship of a foreign state or is under any acknowledgement of allegiance to a foreign state, and 
(e) if he is so disqualified under any law made by Parliament.

Accordingly, the Parliament has prescribed a number of additional disqualifications in the Representation of People Act (1951). These are similar to those for Parliament. These are mentioned here:
1. He must not have been found guilty of certain election offences or corrupt practices in the elections. 
2. He must not have been convicted for any offence resulting in imprisonment for two or more years. But, the detention of a person under a preventive detention law is not a disqualification. 
3. He must not have failed to lodge an account of his election expenses within the time. 
4. He must not have any interest in government contracts, works or services. 
5. He must not be a director or managing agent nor hold an office of profit in a corporation in which the government has at least 25 per cent share. 
6. He must not have been dismissed from government service for corruption or disloyalty to the state. 
7. He must not have been convicted for promoting enmity between different groups or for the offence of bribery. 
8. He must not have been punished for preaching and practicing social crimes such as untouchability, dowry and sati.
On the question whether a member has become subject to any of the above disqualifications, the governor’s decision is final. However, he should obtain the opinion of the Election Commission and act accordingly.

Disqualification on Ground of Defection:
The Constitution also lays down that a person shall be disqualified for being a member of either House of state legislature if he is so disqualified on the ground of defection under the provisions of the Tenth Schedule.
The question of disqualification under the Tenth Schedule is decided by the Chairman, in the case of legislative council and, Speaker, in the case of legislative assembly (and not by the governor). In 1992, the Supreme Court ruled that the decision of Chairman/Speaker in this regard is subject to judicial review.

3. Oath or Affirmation:
Every member of either House of state legislature, before taking his seat in the House, has to make and subscribe an oath or affirmation before the governor or some person appointed by him for this purpose.
In this oath, a member of the state legislature swears:
(a) to bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of India;
(b) to uphold the sovereignty and integrity of India; and
(c) to faithfully discharge the duty of his office.
Unless a member takes the oath, he cannot vote and participate in the proceedings of the House and does not become eligible to the privileges and immunities of the state legislature. A person is liable to a penalty of Rs. 500 for each day he sits or votes as a member in a House:
(a) before taking and subscribing the prescribed oath or affirmation; or
(b) when he knows that he is not qualified or that he is disqualified for its membership; or
(c) when he knows that he is prohibited from sitting or voting in the House by virtue of any law made by Parliament or the state legislature.
Members of a state legislature are entitled to receive such salaries and allowances as may from time to time be determined by the state legislature.

4. Vacation of Seats:
In the following cases, a member of the state legislature vacates his seat:
(a) Double Membership: A person cannot be a member of both Houses of state legislature at one and the same time. If a person is elected to both the Houses, his seat in one of the Houses falls vacant as per the provisions of a law made by the state legislature. 
(b) Disqualification: If a member of the state legislature becomes subject to any of the disqualifications, his seat becomes vacant. 
(c) Resignation: A member may resign his seat by writing to the Chairman of legislative council or Speaker of legislative assembly, as the case may be. The seat falls vacant when the resignation is accepted. 
(d) Absence: A House of the state legislature can declare the seat of a member vacant if he absents himself from all its meeting for a period of sixty days without its permission.
(e) Other Cases: A member has to vacate his seat in the either House of state legislature,
(i) if his election is declared void by the court,
(ii) if he is expelled by the House,
(iii) if he is elected to the office of president or office of vice-president and
(iv) if he is appointed to the office of governor of a state.

PRESIDING OFFICERS OF STATE LEGISLATURE:
Each House of state legislature has its own presiding officer. There is a Speaker and a Deputy Speaker for the legislative assembly and a Chairman and a Deputy Chairman for the legislative council. A panel of chairman for the assembly and a panel of vice-chairman for the council is also appointed.

Speaker of Assembly:
The Speaker is elected by the assembly itself from amongst its members. Usually, the Speaker remains in office during the life of the assembly. However, he vacates his office earlier in any of the following three cases:
1. if he ceases to be a member of the assembly;
2. if he resigns by writing to the deputy speaker; and
3. if he is removed by a resolution passed by a majority of all the then members of the assembly. Such a resolution can be moved only after giving 14 days advance notice.

The Speaker has the following powers and duties:
1. He maintains order and decorum in the assembly for conducting its business and regulating its proceedings. This is his primary responsibility and he has final power in this regard.
2. He is the final interpreter of the provisions of 
(a) the Constitution of India, 
(b) the rules of procedure and conduct of business of assembly, and 
(c) the legislative precedents, within the assembly.
3. He adjourns the assembly or suspends the meeting in the absence of a quorum.
4. He does not vote in the first instance. But, he can exercise a casting vote in the case of a tie.
5. He can allow a ‘secret’ sitting of the House at the request of the leader of the House.
6. He decides whether a bill is a Money Bill or not and his decision on this question is final. 
7. He decides the questions of disqualification of a member of the assembly, arising on the ground of defection under the provisions of the Tenth Schedule. 
8. He appoints the chairman of all the committees of the assembly and supervises their functioning. He himself is the chairman of the Business Advisory Committee, the Rules Committee and the General Purpose Committee.

Deputy Speaker of Assembly:
Like the Speaker, the Deputy Speaker is also elected by the assembly itself from amongst its members. He is elected after the election of the Speaker has taken place.
Like the Speaker, the Deputy Speaker remains in office usually during the life of the assembly. However, he also vacates his office earlier in any of the following three cases:
1. if he ceases to be a member of the assembly;
2. if he resigns by writing to the speaker; and
3. if he is removed by a resolution passed by a majority of all the then members of the assembly. Such a resolution can be moved only after giving 14 days’ advance notice.
The Deputy Speaker performs the duties of the Speaker’s office when it is vacant. He also acts as the Speaker when the latter is absent from the sitting of assembly. In both the cases, he has all the powers of the Speaker.
The Speaker nominates from amongst the members a panel of chairman. Any one of them can preside over the assembly in the absence of the Speaker or the Deputy Speaker. He has the same powers as the speaker when so presiding. He holds office until a new panel of chairman is nominated.

Chairman of Council:
The Chairman is elected by the council itself from amongst its members.
The Chairman vacates his office in any of the following three cases:
1. if he ceases to be a member of the council;
2. if he resigns by writing to the deputy chairman; and
3. if he is removed by a resolution passed by a majority of all the then members of the council. Such a resolution can be moved only after giving 14 days advance notice.
As a presiding officer, the powers and functions of the Chairman in the council are similar to those of the Speaker in the assembly. However, the Speaker has one special power which is not enjoyed by the Chairman. The Speaker decides whether a bill is a Money Bill or not and his decision on this question is final.
The salaries and allowances of the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker of the assembly and the Chairman and the Deputy Chairman of the council are fixed by the state legislature. They are charged on the Consolidated Fund of the State and thus are not subject to the annual vote of the state legislature.

Deputy Chairman of Council:
Like the Chairman, the Deputy Chairman is also elected by the council itself from amongst its members.
The deputy chairman vacates his office in any of the following three cases:
1. if he ceases to be a member of the council;
2. if he resigns by writing to the Chairman; and
3. if he is removed by a resolution passed by a majority of all the then members of the council. Such a resolution can be moved only after giving 14 days advance notice.
The Deputy Chairman performs the duties of the Chairman’s office when it is vacant. He also acts as the Chairman when the latter is absent from the sitting of the council. In both the cases, he has all the powers of the Chairman.
The Chairman nominates from amongst the members a panel of vice-chairman. Any one of them can preside over the council in the absence of the Chairman or the Deputy Chairman. He has the same powers as the chairman when so presiding. He holds office until a new panel of vice-chairman is nominated.

SESSIONS OF STATE LEGISLATURE:
Summoning: 
The governor from time to time summons each House of state legislature to meet. The maximum gap between the two sessions of state legislature cannot be more than six months, ie, the state legislature should meet at least twice a year. A session of the state legislature consists of many sittings.  Adjournment: An adjournment suspends the work in a sitting for a specified time which may be hours, days or weeks. Adjournment sine die means terminating a sitting of the state legislature for an indefinite period. The power of the adjournment as well as adjournment sine die lies with the presiding officer of the House.  Prorogation: The presiding officer (Speaker or Chairman) declares the House adjourned sine die, when the business of the session is completed. Within the next few days, the governor issues a notification for prorogation of the session. However, the governor can also prorogue the House which is in session. Unlike an adjournment, a prorogation terminates a session of the House.

Dissolution: 
The legislative council, being a permanent house, is not subject to dissolution. Only the legislative assembly is subject to dissolution. Unlike a prorogation, a dissolution ends the very life of the existing House, and a new House is constituted after the general elections are held. The position with respect to lapsing of bills on the dissolution of the assembly is mentioned below: 
1. A Bill pending in the assembly lapses (whether originating in the assembly or transmitted to it by the council).
2. A Bill passed by the assembly but pending in the council lapses.
3. A Bill pending in the council but not passed by the assembly does not lapse.
4. A Bill passed by the assembly (in a unicameral state) or passed by both the houses (in a bicameral state) but pending assent of the governor or the President does not lapse.
5. A Bill passed by the assembly (in a unicameral state) or passed by both the Houses (in a bicameral state) but returned by the president for reconsideration of House (s) does not lapse.

Quorum:
Quorum is the minimum number of members required to be present in the House before it can transact any business. It is ten members or one-tenth of the total number of members of the House (including the presiding officer), whichever is greater. If there is no quorum during a meeting of the House, it is the duty of the presiding officer either to adjourn the House or to suspend the meeting until there is a quorum.

Voting in House:
All matters at any sitting of either House are decided by a majority of votes of the members present and voting excluding the presiding officer. Only a few matters which are specifically mentioned in the Constitution like removal of the speaker of the assembly, removal of the Chairman of the council and so on require special majority, not ordinary majority. The presiding officer (i.e., Speaker in the case of assembly or chairman in the case of council or the person acting as such) does not vote in the first instance, but exercises a casting vote in the case of an equality of votes.

Language in State Legislature:
The Constitution has declared the official language(s) of the state or Hindi or English, to be the languages for transacting business in the state legislature. However, the presiding officer can permit a member to address the House in his mother-tongue. The state legislature is authorised to decide whether to continue or discontinue English as a floor language after the completion of fifteen years from the commencement of the Constitution (i.e., from 1965). In case of Himachal Pradesh, Manipur, Meghalaya and Tripura, this time limit is twenty-five years and that of Arunachal Pradesh, Goa and Mizoram, it is forty years.

Rights of Ministers and Advocate General:
In addition to the members of a House, every minister and the advocate general of the state have the right to speak and take part in the proceedings of either House or any of its committees of which he is named a member, without being entitled to vote. There are two reasons underlying this constitutional provision:
1. A minister can participate in the proceedings of a House, of which he is not a member. 
2. A minister, who is not a member of either House, can participate in the proceedings of both the Houses. 

LEGISLATIVE PROCEDURE IN STATE LEGISLATURE:
Ordinary Bills:
Bill in the Originating House:
An ordinary bill can originate in either House of the state legislature (in case of a bicameral legislature). Such a bill can be introduced either by a minister or by any other member. The bill passes through three stages in the originating House, viz,
1. First reading,
2. Second reading, and
3. Third reading.
After the bill is passed by the originating House, it is transmitted to the second House for consideration and passage. A bill is deemed to have been passed by the state legislature only when both the Houses have agreed to it, either with or without amendments. In case of a unicameral legislature, a bill passed by the legislative assembly is sent directly to the governor for his assent.

Bill in the Second House:
In the second House also, the bill passes through all the three stages, that is, first reading, second reading and third reading. When a bill is passed by the legislative assembly and transmitted to the legislative council, the latter has four alternatives before it:
1. it may pass the bill as sent by the assembly (i.e., without amendments);
2. it may pass the bill with amendments and return it to the assembly for reconsideration;
3. it may reject the bill altogether; and
4. it may not take any action and thus keep the bill pending.
If the council passes the bill without amendments or the assembly accepts the amendments suggested by the council, the bill is deemed to have been passed by both the Houses and the same is sent to the the governor for his assent. On the other hand, if the assembly rejects the amendments suggested by the council or the council rejects the bill altogether or the council does not take any action for three months, then the assembly may pass the bill again and transmit the same to the council. If the council rejects the bill again or passes the bill with amendments not acceptable to the assembly or does not pass the bill within one month, then the bill is deemed to have been passed by both the Houses in the form in which it was passed by the assembly for the second time.
Therefore, the ultimate power of passing an ordinary bill is vested in the assembly. At the most, the council can detain or delay the bill for a period of four months–three months in the first instance and one month in the second instance. The Constitution does not provide for the mechanism of joint sitting of both the Houses to resolve the disagreement between the two Houses over a bill. On the other hand, there is a provision for joint sitting of the Lok Sabha and the Rajya Sabha to resolve a disagreement between the two over an ordinary bill. Moreover, when a bill, which has originated in the council and was sent to the assembly, is rejected by the assembly, the bill ends and becomes dead.
Thus, the council has been given much lesser significance, position and authority than that of the Rajya Sabha at the Centre.

Assent of the Governor:
Every bill, after it is passed by the assembly or by both the Houses in case of a bicameral legislature, is presented to the governor for his assent. There are four alternatives before the governor:
1. he may give his assent to the bill;
2. he may withhold his assent to the bill;
3. he may return the bill for reconsideration of the House or Houses; and
4. he may reserve the bill for the consideration of the President.
If the governor gives his assent to the bill, the bill becomes an Act and is placed on the Statute Book. If the governor withholds his assent to the bill, the bill ends and does not become an Act. If the governor returns the bill for reconsideration and if the bill is passed by the House or both the Houses again, with or without amendments, and presented to the governor for his assent, the governor must give his assent to the bill. Thus, the governor enjoys only a suspensive veto. The position is same at the Central level also.

Assent of the President:
When a bill is reserved by the governor for the consideration of the President, the President may either give his assent to the bill or withhold his assent to the bill or return the bill for reconsideration of the House or Houses of the state legislature. When a bill is so returned, the House or Houses have to reconsider it within a period of six months. The bill is presented again to the presidential assent after it is passed by the House or Houses with or without amendments. It is not mentioned in the Constitution whether it is obligatory on the part of the president to give his assent to such a bill or not.

Money Bills:
The Constitution lays down a special procedure for the passing of Money Bills in the state legislature. This is as follows:
A Money Bill cannot be introduced in the legislative council. It can be introduced in the legislative assembly only and that too on the recommendation of the governor. Every such bill is considered to be a government bill and can be introduced only by a minister. After a Money Bill is passed by the legislative assembly, it is transmitted to the legislative council for its consideration. The legislative council has restricted powers with regard to a Money Bill. It cannot reject or amend a Money Bill. It can only make recommendations and must return the bill to the legislative assembly within 14 days. The legislative assembly can either accept or reject all or any of the recommendations of the legislative council.
If the legislative assembly accepts any recommendation, the bill is then deemed to have been passed by both the Houses in the modified form. If the legislative assembly does not accept any recommendation, the bill is then deemed to have been passed by both the Houses in the form originally passed by the legislative assembly without any change.
If the legislative council does not return the bill to the legislative assembly within 14 days, the bill is deemed to have been passed by both Houses at the expiry of the said period in the form originally passed by the legislative assembly. Thus, the legislative assembly has more powers than legislative council with regard to a money bill. At the most, the legislative council can detain or delay a money bill for a period of 14 days.
Finally, when a Money Bill is presented to the governor, he may either give his assent, withhold his assent or reserve the bill for presidential assent but cannot return the bill for reconsideration of the state legislature. Normally, the governor gives his assent to a money bill as it is introduced in the state legislature with his prior permission. When a money bill is reserved for consideration of the President, the president may either give his assent to the bill or withhold his assent to the bill but cannot return the bill for reconsideration of the state legislature.

POSITION OF LEGISLATIVE COUNCIL:
The constitutional position of the council (as compared with the assembly) can be studied from two angles:
A. Spheres where council is equal to assembly.
B. Spheres where council is unequal to assembly.

Equal with Assembly:
In the following matters, the powers and status of the council are broadly equal to that of the assembly:
1. Introduction and passage of ordinary bills. However, in case of disagreement between the two Houses, the will of the assembly prevails over that of the council.
2. Approval of ordinances issued by the governor.
3. Selection of ministers including the chief minister. Under the Constitution the, ministers including the chief minister can be members of either House of the state legislature. However, irrespective of their membership, they are responsible only to the assembly.
4. Consideration of the reports of the constitutional bodies like State Finance Commission, state public service commission and Comptroller and Auditor General of India.
5. Enlargement of the jurisdiction of the state public service commission.

Unequal with Assembly:
In the following matters, the powers and status of the council are unequal to that of the assembly:
1. A Money Bill can be introduced only in the assembly and not in the council.
2. The council cannot amend or reject a money bill. It should return the bill to the assembly within 14 days, either with recommendations or without recommendations.
3. The assembly can either accept or reject all or any of the recommendation of the council. In both the cases, the money bill is deemed to have been passed by the two Houses.
4. The final power to decide whether a particular bill is a money bill or not is vested in the Speaker of the assembly.
5. The final power of passing an ordinary bill also lies with the assembly. At the most, the council can detain or delay the bill for the period of four months–three months in the first instance and one month in the second instance. In other words, the council is not even a revising body like the Rajya Sabha; it is only a dilatory chamber or an advisory body.
6. The council can only discuss the budget but cannot vote on the demands for grants (which is the exclusive privilege of the assembly).
7. The council cannot remove the council of ministers by passing a no-confidence motion. This is because, the council of ministers is collectively responsible only to the assembly. But, the council can discus and criticise the policies and activities of the Government.
8. When an ordinary bill, which has originated in the council and was sent to the assembly, is rejected by the assembly, the bill ends and becomes dead.
9. The council does not participate in the election of the president
of India and representatives of the state in the Rajya Sabha.
10. The council has no effective say in the ratification of a constitutional amendment bill. In this respect also, the will of the assembly prevails over that of the council.
11. Finally, the very existence of the council depends on the will of the assembly. The council can be abolished by the Parliament on the recommendation of the assembly.

From the above, it is clear that the position of the council vis-a-vis the assembly is much weaker than the position of the Rajya Sabha vis-a-vis the Lok Sabha. The Rajya Sabha has equal powers with the Lok Sabha in all spheres except financial matters and with regard to the control over the Government. On the other hand, the council is subordinate to the assembly in all respects. Thus, the predominance of the assembly over the council is fully established.

Even though both the council and the Rajya Sabha are second chambers, the Constitution has given the council much lesser importance than the Rajya Sabha due to the following reasons:
1. The Rajya Sabha consists of the representatives of the states and thus reflect the federal element of the polity. It maintains the federal equilibrium by protecting the interests of the states against the undue interference of the Centre. Therefore, it has to be an effective revising body and not just an advisory body or dilatory body like that of the council. Onthe other hand, the issue of federal significance does not arise in the case of a council.
2. The council is heterogeneously constituted. It represents different interests and consists of differently elected members and also include some nominated members. Its very composition makes its position weak and reduces its utility as an effective revising body. On the other hand, the Rajya Sabha is homogeneously constituted. It represents only the states and consists of mainly elected members (only 12 out of 250 are nominated).
3. The position accorded to the council is in accordance with the principles of democracy. The council should yield to the assembly, which is a popular house. This pattern of relationship between the two Houses of the state legislature is adopted from the British model. In Britain, the House of Lords (Upper House) cannot oppose and obstruct the House of Commons (Lower House). The House of Lords is only a dilatory chamber–it can delay an ordinary bill for a maximum period of one year and a money bill for one month.

Keeping in view its weak, powerless and insignificant position and role, the critics have described the council as a ‘secondary chamber’, ‘costly ornamental luxury’, ‘white elephant’, etc. The critics have opined that the council has served as a refuge for those who are defeated in the assembly elections. It enabled the unpopular, rejected and ambitious politicians to occupy the post of a chief minister or a minister or a member of the state legislature.
Even though the council has been given less powers as compared with the assembly, its utility is supported on the following grounds:
1. It checks the hasty, defective, careless and ill-considered legislation made by the assembly by making provision for revision and thought.
2. It facilitates representation of eminent professionals and experts who cannot face direct elections. The governor nominates onesixth members of the council to provide representation to such people.

PRIVILEGES OF STATE LEGISLATURE:
Privileges of a state legislature are a sum of special rights, immunities and exemptions enjoyed by the Houses of state legislature, their committees and their members. They are necessary in order to secure the independence and effectiveness of their actions. Without these privileges, the Houses can neither maintain their authority, dignity and honour nor can protect their members from any obstruction in the discharge of their legislative responsibilities.
The Constitution has also extended the privileges of the state legislature to those persons who are entitled to speak and take part in the proceedings of a House of the state legislature or any of its committees. These include advocate-general of the state and state ministers.
It must be clarified here that the privileges of the state legislature do not extend to the governor who is also an integral part of the state legislature.
The privileges of a state legislature can be classified into two broad categories–those that are enjoyed by each House of the state legislature collectively, and those that are enjoyed by the members individually.

Collective Privileges:
The privileges belonging to each House of the state legislature collectively are:
1. It has the right to publish its reports, debates and proceedings and also the right to prohibit others from publishing the same.
2. It can exclude strangers from its proceedings and hold secret sittings to discuss some important matters.
3. It can make rules to regulate its own procedure and the conduct of its business and to adjudicate upon such matters.
4. It can punish members as well as outsiders for breach of its privileges or its contempt by reprimand, admonition or imprisonment (also suspension or expulsion, in case of
members).
5. It has the right to receive immediate information of the arrest, detention, conviction, imprisonment and release of a member.
6. It can institute inquiries and order the attendance of witnesses and send for relevant papers and records.
7. The courts are prohibited to inquire into the proceedings of a House or its Committes.
8. No person (either a member or outsider) can be arrested, and no legal process (civil or criminal) can be served within the precincts of the House without the permission of the presiding officer.

Individual Privileges:
The privileges belonging to the members individually are:
1. They cannot be arrested during the session of the state legislature and 40 days before the beginning and 40 days after the end of such session. This privilege is available only in civil cases and not in criminal cases or preventive detention cases.
2. They have freedom of speech in the state legislature. No member is liable to any proceedings in any court for anything said or any vote given by him in the state legislature or its committees. This freedom is subject to the provisions of the Constitution and to the rules and standing orders regulating the procedure of the state legislature.
3. They are exempted from jury service. They can refuse to give evidence and appear as a witness in a case pending in a court when the state legislature is in session.

High Court
In the Indian single integrated judicial system, the high court operates below the Supreme Court but above the subordinate courts. The judiciary ina state consists of a high court and a hierarchy of subordinate courts. The high court occupies the top position in the judicial administration of a state.

The institution of high court originated in India in 1862 when the high courts were set up at Calcutta, Bombay and Madras1. In 1866, a fourth high court was established at Allahabad. In the course of time, each province in British India came to have its own high court. After 1950, a high court existing in a province became the high court for the corresponding state.
The Constitution of India provides for a high court for each state, but the Seventh Amendment Act of 1956 authorised the Parliament to establish a common high court for two or more states or for two or more states and a union territory. The territorial jurisdiction of a high court is co-terminus with the territory of a state. Similarly, the territorial jurisdiction of a common high court is co-terminus with the territories of the concerned states and union territory.

At present (2019), there are 25 high courts in the country. Out of them, only three high courts have jurisdiction over more than one state. Among the nine union territories, Delhi alone has a separate high court (since 1966). The union territories of Jammu and Kashmir and Ladakh have a common high court. The other union territories fall under the jurisdiction of different state high courts. The Parilament can extend the jurisdiction of a high court to any union territory or exclude the jurisdiction of a high court from any union territory.

Articles 214 to 231 in Part VI of the Constitution deal with the organisation, independence, jurisdiction, powers, procedures and so on of the high courts.

COMPOSITION AND APPOINTMENT:
Every high court (whether exclusive or common) consists of a chief justice and such other judges as the president may from time to time deem necessary to appoint. Thus, the Constitution does not specify the strength of a high court and leaves it to the discretion of the president. Accordingly, the President determines the strength of a high court from time to time depending upon its workload.

Appointment of Judges:
The judges of a high court are appointed by the President. The chief justice is appointed by the President after consultation with the chief justice of India and the governor of the state concerned. For appointment of other judges, the chief justice of the concerned high court is also consulted. In case of a common high court for two or more states, the governors of all the states concerned are consulted by the president.

In the Second Judges case (1993), the Supreme Court ruled that no appointment of a judge of the high court can be made, unless it is in conformity with the opinion of the chief justice of India. In the Third Judges case4 (1998), the Supreme Court opined that in case of the appointment of high court judges, the chief justice of India should consult a collegium of two senior-most judges of the Supreme Court. Thus, the sole opinion of the chief justice of India alone does not constitute the ‘consultation’ process.

The 99th Constitutional Amendment Act of 2014 and the National Judicial Appointments Commission Act of 2014 have replaced the Collegium System of appointing judges to the Supreme Court and High Courts with a new body called the National Judicial Appointments Commission (NJAC). However, in 2015, the Supreme Court has declared both the 99th Constitutional Amendment as well as the NJAC Act as unconstitutional and void. Consequently, the earlier collegium system became operative again. This verdict was delivered by the Supreme Court in the Fourth Judges case4a (2015). The Court opined that the new system (i.e., NJAC) would affect the independence of the judiciary.

QUALIFICATIONS, OATH AND SALARIES:
Qualifications of Judges:
A person to be appointed as a judge of a high court, should have the following qualifications:
1. He should be a citizen of India.
2. (a) He should have held a judicial office in the territory of India for ten years; or
(b) He should have been an advocate of a high court (or high courts in succession) for ten years.
From the above, it is clear that the Constitution has not prescribed a minimum age for appointment as a judge of a high court. Moreover, unlike in the case of the Supreme Court, the Consitution makes no provision for appointment of a distinguished jurist as a judge of a high court.

Oath or Affirmation:
A person appointed as a judge of a high court, before entering upon his office, has to make and subscribe an oath or affirmation before the governor of the state or some person appointed by him for this purpose. In his oath, a judge of a high court swears:
1. to bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of India;
2. to uphold the sovereignty and integrity of India;
3. to duly and faithfully and to the best of his ability, knowledge and judgement perform the duties of the office without fear or favour, affection or ill-will; and
4. to uphold the Constitution and the laws.

Salaries and Allowances of the Judges of a High Court:
The salaries, allowances, privileges, leave and pension of the judges of a high court are determined from time to time by the Parliament. They cannot be varied to their disadvantage after their appointment except during a financial emergency. In 2018, the salary of the chief justice was increased from Rs. 90,000 to 2.50 lakh per month and that of a judge from Rs.80,000 to 2.25 lakh per month. They are also paid sumptuary allowance and provided with free accommodation and other facilities like medical, car, telephone, etc. The retired chief justice and judges are entitled to 50% of their last drawn salary as monthly pension.

TENURE, REMOVAL AND TRANSFER:
Tenure of Judges of a High Court:
The Constitution has not fixed the tenure of a judge of a high court. However, it makes the following four provisions in this regard:
1. He holds office until he attains the age of 62 years5. Any questions regarding his age is to be decided by the president after consultation with the chief justice of India and the decision of the president is final.
2. He can resign his office by writing to the president.
3. He can be removed from his office by the President on the recommendation of the Parliament.
4. He vacates his office when he is appointed as a judge of the Supreme Court or when he is transferred to another high court.

Removal of Judges of a High Court:
A judge of a high court can be removed from his office by an order of the President. The President can issue the removal order only after an address by the Parliament has been presented to him in the same session for such removal. The address must be supported by a special majority of each House of Parliament (i.e., a majority of the total membership of that House and majority of not less than two-thirds of the members of that House present and voting). The grounds of removal are two–proved misbehaviour or incapacity. Thus, a judge of a high court can be removed in the same manner and on the same grounds as a judge of the Supreme Court.

The Judges Enquiry Act (1968) regulates the procedure relating to the removal of a judge of a high court by the process of impeachment:
1. A removal motion signed by 100 members (in the case of Lok Sabha) or 50 members (in the case of Rajya Sabha) is to be given to the Speaker/Chairman.
2. The Speaker/Chairman may admit the motion or refuse to admit it.
3. If it is admitted, then the Speaker/ Chairman is to constitute a three-member committee to investigate into the charges.
4. The committee should consist of (a) the chief justice or a judge of the Supreme Court, (b) a chief justice of a high court, and (c) a distinguished jurist.
5. If the committee finds the judge to be guilty of misbehaviour or suffering from an incapacity, the House can take up the consideration of the motion.
6. After the motion is passed by each House of Parliament by special majority, an address is presented to the president for removal of the judge.
7. Finally, the president passes an order removing the judge. 
From the above, it is clear that the procedure for the impeachment of a judge of a high court is the same as that for a judge of the Supreme Court. It is interesting to know that no judge of a high court has been impeached so far.

Transfer of Judges of a High Court:
The President can transfer a judge from one high court to another after consulting the Chief Justice of India. On transfer, he is entitled to receive in addition to his salary such compensatory allowance as may be determined by Parliament.

In 1977, the Supreme Court ruled that the transfer of high court judges could be resorted to only as an exceptional measure and only in public interest and not by way of punishment. Again in 1994, the Supreme Court held that judicial review is necessary to check arbitrariness in transfer of judges. But, only the judge who is transferred can challenge it.

In the Third Judges case (1998), the Supreme Court opined that in case of the transfer of high court judges, the Chief Justice of India should consult, in addition to the collegium of four seniormost judges of the Supreme Court, the chief justice of the two high courts (one from which the judge is being transferred and the other receiving him). Thus, the sole opinion of the chief justice of India does not constitute the ‘consultation’ process.

ACTING, ADDITIONAL AND RETIRED JUDGES:
Acting Chief Justice of a High Court:
The President can appoint a judge of a high court as an acting chief justice of the high court when:
1. the office of chief justice of the high court is vacant; or
2. the chief justice of the high court is temporarily absent; or
3. the chief justice of the high court is unable to perform the duties of his office.

Additional and Acting Judges of a High Court:
The President can appoint duly qualified persons as additional judges of a high court for a temporary period not exceeding two years when:
1. there is a temporary increase in the business of the high court; or
2. there are arrears of work in the high court.
The President can also appoint a duly qualified person as an acting judge of a high court when a judge of that high court (other than the chief justice) is:
1. unable to perform the duties of his office due to absence or any other reason; or
2. appointed to act temporarily as chief justice of that high court.
An acting judge holds office until the permanent judge resumes his office. However, both the additional or acting judge cannot hold office after attaining the age of 62 years.

Retired Judges of a High Court:
At any time, the chief justice of a high court of a state can request a retired judge of that high court or any other high court to act as a judge of the high court of that state for a temporary period. He can do so only with the previous consent of the President and also of the person to be so appointed. Such a judge is entitled to such allowances as the President may determine. He will also enjoy all the jurisdiction, powers and privileges of a judge of that high court. But, he will not otherwise be deemed to be a judge of that high court.

INDEPENDENCE OF HIGH COURT:
The independence of a high court is very essential for the effective discharge of the duties assigned to it. It should be free from the encroachments, pressures and interferences of the executive (council of ministers) and the legislature. It should be allowed to do justice without fear or favour. The Constitution has made the following provisions to safeguard and ensure the independent and impartial functioning of a high court.
1. Mode of Appointment for Judges of a High Court:
The judges of a high court are appointed by the president (which means the cabinet) in consultation with the members of the judiciary itself (i.e., chief justice of India and the chief justice of the high court). This provision curtails the absolute discretion of the executive as well as ensures that the judicial appointments are not based on any political or practical considerations.

2. Security of Tenure for Judges of a High Court:
The judges of a high court are provided with the security of tenure. They can be removed from office by the president only in the manner and on the grounds mentioned in the Constitution. This means that they do not hold their office during the pleasure of the president, though they are appointed by him. This is obvious from the fact that no judge of a high court has been removed (or impeached) so far.

3. Fixed Service Conditions for Judges of a High Court:
The salaries, allowances, privileges, leave and pension of the judges of a high court are determined from time to time by the Parliament. But, they cannot be changed to their disadvantage after their appointment except during a financial emergency. Thus, the conditions of service of the judges of a high court remain same during their term of office.

4. Expenses Charged on Consolidated Fund for Judges of a High Court:
The salaries and allowances of the judges, the salaries, allowances and pensions of the staff as well as the administrative expenses of a high court are charged on the consolidated fund of the state. Thus, they are non-votable by the state legislature (though they can be discussed by it). It should be noted here that the pension of a high court judge is charged on the Consolidated Fund of India and not the state.

5. Conduct of Judges cannot be Discussed:
The Constitution prohibits any discussion in Parliament or in a state legislature with respect to the conduct of the judges of a high court in the discharge of their duties, except when an impeachment motion is under consideration of the Parliament.

6. Ban on Practice after Retirement:
The retired permanent judges of a high court are prohibited from pleading or acting in any court or before any authority in India except the Supreme Court and the other high courts. This ensures that they do not favour any one in the hope of future favour.

7. Power to Punish for its Contempt:
A high court can punish any person for its contempt. Thus, its actions and decisions cannot be criticised and opposed by anybody. This power is vested in a high court to maintain its authority, dignity and honour.

8. Freedom to Appoint its Staff
The chief justice of a high court can appoint officers and servants of the high court without any interference from the executive. He can also prescribe their conditions of service.

9. Its Jurisdiction cannot be Curtailed
The jurisdiction and powers of a high court in so far as they are specified in the Constitution cannot be curtailed both by the Parliament and the state legislature. But, in other respects, the jurisdiction and powers of a high court can be changed both by the parliament and the state legislature.

10. Separation from Executive
The Constitution directs the state to take steps to separate the judiciary from the executive in public services. This means that the executive authorities should not possess the judicial powers. Consequent upon its implementation, the role of executive authorities in judicial administration came to an end.

JURISDICTION AND POWERS OF HIGH COURT:
Like the Supreme Court, the high court has been vested with quite extensive and effective powers. It is the highest court of appeal in the state. It is the protector of the Fundamental Rights of the citizens. It is vested with the power to interpret the Constitution. Besides, it has supervisory and consultative roles.

However, the Constitution does not contain detailed provisions with regard to the jurisdiction and powers of a high court. It only lays down that the jurisdiction and powers of a high court are to be the same as immediately before the commencement of the Constitution. But, there is one addition, that is, the Constitution gives a high court jurisdiction over revenue matters (which it did not enjoy in the pre-con-stitution era). The Constitution also confers (by other provisions) some more additional powers on a high court like writ jurisdiction, power of superintendence, consultative power, etc. Moreover, it empowers the Parliament and the state legislature to change the jurisdiction and powers of a high court.

At present, a high court enjoys the following jurisdiction and powers:
1. Original jurisdiction.
2. Writ jurisdiction.
3. Appellate jurisdiction.
4. Supervisory jurisdiction.
5. Control over subordinate courts.
6. A court of record.
7. Power of judicial review.
The present jurisdiction and powers of a high court are governed by (a) the constitutional provisions, (b) the Letters Patent, (c) the Acts of Parliament, (d) the Acts of State Legislature, (e) Indian Penal Code, 1860, (f) Cirminal Procedure Code, 1973, and (g) Civil Procedure Code, 1908.

1. Original Jurisdiction of high court :
It means the power of a high court to hear disputes in the first
instance, not by way of appeal. It extends to the following:
(a) Matters of admirality and contempt of court.
(b) Disputes relating to the election of members of Parliament and state legislatures.
(c) Regarding revenue matter or an act ordered or done in revenue collection.
(d) Enforcement of fundamental rights of citizens.
(e) Cases ordered to be transferred from a subordinate court involving the interpretation of the Constitution to its own file.
(f) The four high courts (i.e., Calcutta, Bombay, Madras and Delhi High Courts) have original civil jurisdiction in cases of higher value.
Before 1973, the Calcutta, Bombay and Madras High Courts also had original criminal jurisdiction. This was fully abolished by the Criminal Procedure Code, 1973.

2. Writ Jurisdiction of high court :
Article 226 of the Constitution empowers a high court to issue writs including habeas corpus, mandamus, certiorari, prohibition and quo warranto for the enforcement of the fundamental rights of the citizens and for any other purpose. The phrase ‘for any other purpose’ refers to the enforcement of an ordinary legal right. The high court can issue writs to any person, authority and government not only within its territorial jurisdiction but also outside its territorial jurisdiction if the cause of action arises within its territorial jurisdiction.

The writ jurisdiction of the high court (under Article 226) is not exclusive but concurrent with the writ jurisdiction of the Supreme Court (under Article 32). It means, when the fundamental rights of a citizen are violated, the aggrieved party has the option of moving either the high court or the Supreme Court directly. However, the writ jurisdiction of the high court is wider than that of the Supreme Court. This is because, the Supreme Court can issue writs only for the enforcement of fundamental rights and not for any other purpose, that is, it does not extend to a case where the breach of an ordinary legal right is alleged.

In the Chandra Kumar case9 (1997), the Supreme Court ruled that the writ jurisdiction of both the high court and the Supreme Court constitute a part of the basic structure of the Constitution. Hence, it cannot be ousted or excluded even by way of an amendment to the Constitution.

3. Appellate Jurisdiction of high court :
A high court is primarily a court of appeal. It hears appeals against the judgements of subordinate courts functioning in its territorial jurisdiction. It has appellate jurisdiction in both civil and criminal matters. Hence, the appellate jurisdiction of a high court is wider than its original jurisdiction.
(a) Civil Matters:
The civil appellate jurisdiction of a high court is as follows:
(i) First appeals from the orders and judgements of the district courts, additional district courts and other subordinate courts lie directly to the high court, on both questions of law and fact, if the amount exceeds the stipulated limit.
(ii) Second appeals from the orders and judgements of the district court or other subordinate courts lie to the high court in the cases involving questions of law only (and not questions of fact).
(iii) The Calcutta, Bombay and Madras High Courts have provision for intra-court appeals. When a single judge of the high court has decided a case (either under the original or appellate jurisdiction of the high court), an appeal from such a decision lies to the division bench of the same high court.
(iv) Appeals from the decisions of the administrative and other tribunals lie to the division bench of the state high court. In 1997, the Supreme Court ruled that the tribunals are subject to the writ jurisdiction of the high courts. Consequently, it is not possible for an aggrieved person to approach the Supreme Court directly against the decisions of the tribunals, without first going to the high courts.

(b) Criminal Matters
The criminal appellate jurisdiction of a high court is as follows:
(i) Appeals from the judgements of sessions court and additional sessions court lie to the high court if the sentence is one of imprisonment for more than seven years. It should also be noted here that a death sentence (popularly known as capital punishment) awarded by a sessions court or an additional sessions court should be confirmed by the high court before it can be executed, whether there is an appeal by the convicted person or not.
(ii) In some cases specified in various provisions of the Criminal Procedure Code (1973), the appeals from the judgements of the assistant sessions judge, metropolitan magistrate or other magistrates (judicial) lie to the high court.

4. Supervisory Jurisdiction of high court :
A high court has the power of superintendence over all courts and tribunals functioning in its territorial jurisdiction (except military courts or tribunals). Thus, it may–
(a) call for returns from them;
(b) make and issue, general rules and prescribe forms for regulating the practice and proceedings of them;
(c) prescribe forms in which books, entries and accounts are to be kept by them; and
(d) settle the fees payable to the sheriff, clerks, officers and legal practitioners of them.
This power of superintendence of a high court is very broad because, 
(i) it extends to all courts and tribunals whether they are subject to the appellate jurisdiction of the high court or not; 
(ii) it covers not only administrative superintendence but also judicial superintendence; 
(iii) it is a revisional jurisdiction; and 
(iv) it can be suo-motu (on its own) and not necessarily on the application of a party.
However, this power does not vest the high court with any unlimited authority over the subordinate courts and tribunals. It is an extraordinary power and hence has to be used most sparingly and only in appropriate cases. Usually, it is limited to, 
(i) excess of jurisdiction, 
(ii) gross violation of natural justice, 
(iii) error of law, 
(iv) disregard to the law of superior courts, 
(v) perverse findings, and (vi) manifest injustice. 

5. Control over Subordinate Courts:
In addition to its appellate jurisdiction and supervisory jurisdiction over the subordinate courts as mentioned above, a high court has an administrative control and other powers over them. These include the following:
(a) It is consulted by the governor in the matters of appointment, posting and promotion of district judges and in the appointments of persons to the judicial service of the state (other than district judges).
(b) It deals with the matters of posting, promotion, grant of leave, transfers and discipline of the members of the judicial service of the state (other than district judges).
(c) It can withdraw a case pending in a subordinate court if it involves a substantial question of law that require the interpretation of the Constitution. It can then either dispose of the case itself or determine the question of law and return the case to the subordinate court with its judgement.
(d) Its law is binding on all subordinate courts functioning within its territorial jurisdiction in the same sense as the law declared by the Supreme Court is binding on all courts in India.

6. A Court of Record:
As a court of record, a high court has two powers:
(a) The judgements, proceedings and acts of the high courts are recorded for perpetual memory and testimony. These records are admitted to be of evidentiary value and cannot be questioned when produced before any subordinate court. They are recognised as legal precedents and legal references.
(b) It has power to punish for contempt of court, either with simple imprisonment or with fine or with both.

The expression ‘contempt of court’ has not been defined by the Constitution. However, the expression has been defined by the Contempt of Court Act of 1971. Under this, contempt of court may be civil or criminal. Civil contempt means wilful disobedience to any judgement, order, writ or other process of a court or wilful breach of an undertaking given to a court. Criminal contempt means the publication of any matter or doing an act which–
(i) scandalises or lowers the authority of a court; or 
(ii) prejudices or interferes with the due course of a judicial proceeding; or 
(iii) interferes or obstructs the administration of justice in any other manner. 
However, innocent publication and distribution of some matter, fair and accurate report of judicial proceedings, fair and reasonable criticism of judicial acts and comment on the administrative side of the judiciary do not amount to contempt of court.

As a court of record, a high court also has the power to review and correct its own judgement or order or decision, even though no specific power of review is conferred on it by the Constitution. The Supreme Court, on the other hand, has been specifically conferred with the power of review by the constitution.

7. Power of Judicial Review:
Judicial review is the power of a high court to examine the constitutionality of legislative enactments and executive orders of both the Central and state governments. On examination, if they are found to be violative of the Constitution (ultra-vires), they can be declared as illegal, unconstitutional and invalid (null and void) by the high court. Consequently, they cannot be enforced by the government.
Though the phrase ‘judicial review’ has no where been used in the Constitution, the provisions of Articles 13 and 226 explicitly confer the power of judicial review on a high court. The constitutional validity of a legislative enactment or an executive order can be challenged in a high court on the following three grounds:
(a) it infringes the fundamental rights (Part III),
(b) it is outside the competence of the authority which has framed it, and
(c) it is repugnant to the constitutional provisions.
The 42nd Amendment Act of 1976 curtailed the judicial review power of high court. It debarred the high courts from considering the constitutional validity of any central law. However, the 43rd
Amendment Act of 1977 restored the original position.

Tribunals:
The original Constitution did not contain provisions with respect to tribunals. The 42nd Amendment Act of 1976 added a new Part XIV-A to the Constitution. This part is entitled as ‘Tribunals’ and consists of only two Articles–Article 323 A dealing with administrative tribunals and Article 323 B dealing with tribunals for other matters.

ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNALS:
Article 323 A empowers the Parliament to provide for the establishment of administrative tribunals for the adjudication of disputes relating to recruitment and conditions of service of persons appointed to public services of the Centre, the states, local bodies, public corporations and other public authorities. In other words, Article 323 A enables the Parliament to take out the adjudication of disputes relating to service matters from the civil courts and the high courts and place it before the administrative tribunals.

In pursuance of Article 323 A, the Parliament has passed the Administrative Tribunals Act in 1985. The act authorises the Central government to establish one Central administrative tribunal and the state administrative tribunals. This act opened a new chapter in the sphere of providing speedy and inexpensive justice to the aggrieved public servants.

Central Administrative Tribunal (CAT):
The Central Administrative Tribunal (CAT) was set up in 1985 with the principal bench at Delhi and additional benches in different states. At present, it has 17 regular benches, 15 of which operate at the principal seats of high courts and the remaining two at Jaipur and Lucknow. These benches also hold circuit sittings at other seats of high courts.

The CAT exercises original jurisdiction in relation to recruitment and all service matters of public servants covered by it. Its jurisdiction extends to the all-India services, the Central civil services, civil posts under the Centre and civilian employees of defence services. However, the members of the defence forces, officers and servants of the Supreme Court and the secretarial staff of the Parliament are not covered by it.

The CAT is a multi-member body consisting of a chairman and members. Originally, the CAT consisted of a Chairman, ViceChairman and members. Later, in 2006, the provision for the ViceChairman was removed by the Administrative Tribunals (Amendment) Act, 2006. Hence, there are now no Vice-Chairman in the CAT. At present (2019), the sanctioned strength of the Chairman is one and sanctioned strength of the Members is 65. They are drawn from both judicial and administrative streams and are appointed by the president. They hold office for a term of five years or until they attain the age of 65 years in case of chairman and 62 years in case of members, whichever is earlier.

The appointment of Members in CAT is made on the basis of recommendations of a high powered selection committee chaired by a sitting Judge of Supreme Court who is nominated by the Chief Justice of India. After obtaining the concurrence of Chief Justice of India, appointments are made with the approval of Appointments Committee of the Cabinet (ACC).

The CAT is not bound by the procedure laid down in the Civil Procedure Code of 1908. It is guided by the principles of natural justice. These principles keep the CAT flexible in approach. Only a nominal fee of Rs. 50 is to be paid by the applicant. The applicant may appear either in person or through a lawyer.

Originally, appeals against the orders of the CAT could be made only in the Supreme Court and not in the high courts. However, in the Chandra Kumar case (1997), the Supreme Court declared this restriction on the jurisdiction of the high courts as unconstitutional, holding that judicial review is a part of the basic structure of the Constitution. It laid down that appeals against the orders of the CAT shall lie before the division bench of the concerned high court. Consequently, now it is not possible for an aggrieved public servant to approach the Supreme Court directly against an order of the CAT, without first going to the concerned high court.

State Administrative Tribunals (SAT):
The Administrative Tribunals Act of 1985 empowers the Central government to establish the State Administrative Tribunals (SATs) on specific request of the concerned state governments. So far (2019), the SATs have been set up in the nine states of Andhra Pradesh, Himachal Pradesh, Odisha, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Tamil Nadu, West Bengal and Kerala. However, the Madhya Pradesh, Tamil Nadu and Himachal Pradesh Tribunals have since been abolished. But subsequently, the Himachal Pradesh reestablished the SAT and the state of Tamil Nadu has also requested now to reestablish the same. Further, the state government of Haryana has requested to establish the SAT for their state. On the other hand, the state government of Odisha has submitted a proposal for abolition of Odisha Administrative Tribunal.

Like the CAT, the SATs exercise original jurisdiction in relation to recruitment and all service matters of state government employees. The chairman and members of the SATs are appointed by the president after consultation with the governor of the state concerned.

The act also makes a provision for setting up of joint administrative tribunal (JAT) for two or more states. A JAT exercises all the jurisdiction and powers exercisable by the administrative tribunals for such states. The chairman and members of a JAT are appointed by the president after consultation with the governors of the concerned states.

TRIBUNALS FOR OTHER MATTERS:
Under Article 323 B, the Parliament and the state legislatures are authorised to provide for the establishment of tribunals for the adjudication of disputes relating to the following matters:
(a) Taxation
(b) Foreign exchange, import and export
(c) Industrial and labour
(d) Land reforms
(e) Ceiling on urban property
(f) Elections to Parliament and state legislatures
(g) Food stuffs
(h) Rent and tenancy rights

Articles 323 A and 323 B differs in the following three aspects:
1. While Article 323 A contemplates establishment of tribunals for public service matters only, Article 323 B contemplates establishment of tribunals for certain other matters 
2. While tribunals under Article 323 A can be established only by Parliament, tribunals under Article 323 B can be established both by Parliament and state legislatures with respect to matters falling within their legislative competence.
3. Under Article 323 A, only one tribunal for the Centre and one for each state or two or more states may be established. There is no question of hierarchy of tribunals, whereas under Article 323 B a hierarchy of tribunals may be created.

In Chandra Kumar case4 (1997), the Supreme Court declared those provisions of these two articles which excluded the jurisdiction of the high courts and the Supreme Court as unconstitutional. Hence, the judicial remedies are now available against the orders of these tribunals.

Subordinate Courts:
The state judiciary consists of a high court and a hierarchy of subordinate courts, also known as lower courts. The subordinate courts are so called because of their subordination to the state high court. They function below and under the high court at district and lower levels.

CONSTITUTIONAL PROVISIONS:
Articles 233 to 237 in Part VI of the Constitution make the following provisions to regulate the organization of subordinate courts and to ensure their independence from the executive.
1. Appointment of District Judges:
The appointment, posting and promotion of district judges in a state are made by the governor of the state in consultation with the high court. A person to be appointed as district judge should have the following qualifications:
(a) He should not already be in the service of the Central or the state government.
(b) He should have been an advocate or a pleader for seven years.
(c) He should be recommended by the high court for appointment.

2. Appointment of District Judges:
Appointment of persons (other than district judges) to the judicial service of a state are made by the governor of the state after consultation with the State Public Service Commission and the high court.

3. Control over Subordinate Courts:
The control over district courts and other subordinate courts including the posting, promotion and leave of persons belonging to the judicial service of a state and holding any post inferior to the post of district judge is vested in the high court.

4. Interpretation:
The expression ‘district judge’ includes judge of a city civil court, additional district judge, joint district judge, assistant district judge, chief judge of a small cause court, chief presidency magistrate, additional chief presidency magistrate, sessions judge, additional sessions judge and assistant sessions judge. The expression ‘judicial service’ means a service consisting exclusively of persons intended to fill the post of district judge and other civil judicial posts inferior to the post of district judge.

5. Application of the above Provisions to Certain Magistrates:
The Governor may direct that the above mentioned provisions relating to persons in the state judicial service would apply to any class or classes of magistrates in the state.

STRUCTURE AND JURISDICTION:
The organisational structure, jurisdiction and nomenclature of the subordinate judiciary are laid down by the states. Hence, they differ slightly from state to state. Broadly speaking, there are three tiers of civil and criminal courts below the High Court. This is shown as follows:

The district judge is the highest judicial authority in the district. He possesses original and appellate jurisdiction in both civil as well as criminal matters. In other words, the district judge is also the sessions judge. When he deals with civil cases, he is known as the district judge and when he hears the criminal cases, he is called as the sessions judge. The district judge exercises both judicial and administrative powers. He also has supervisory powers over all the subordinate courts in the district. Appeals against his orders and judgements lie to the High Court. The sessions judge has the power to impose any sentence including life imprisonment and capital punishment (death sentence). However, a capital punishment passed by him is subject to confirmation by the High Court, whether there is an appeal or not.

Below the District and Sessions Court stands the Court of Subordinate Judge on the civil side and the Court of Chief Judicial Magistrate on the criminal side. The subordinate judge exercises unlimited pecuniary jurisdiction over civil suits. The chief judicial magistrate decides criminal cases which are punishable with imprisonment for a term up to seven years.

At the lowest level, on the civil side, is the Court of Munsiff and on the criminal side, is the Court of Judicial Magistrate. The munsiff possesses limited jurisdiction and decides civil cases of small pecuniary stake. The judicial magistrate tries criminal cases which are punishable with imprisonment for a term up to three years. In some metropolitan cities, there are city civil courts (chief judges) on the civil side and the courts of metropolitan magistrates on the criminal side.

Some of the States and Presidency towns have established small causes courts. These courts decide the civil cases of small value in a summary manner. Their decisions are final, but the High Court possesses a power of revision. In some states, Panchayat Courts try petty civil and criminal cases. They are variously known as Nyaya Panchayat, Gram Kutchery, Adalati Panchayat, Panchayat Adalat and so on.

NATIONAL LEGAL SERVICES AUTHORITY:
Article 39A of the Constitution of India provides for free legal aid to the poor and weaker sections of the society and ensures justice for all. Articles 14 and 22(1) of the Constitution also make it obligatory for the State to ensure equality before law and a legal system which promotes justice on the basis of equal opportunity to all. In the year 1987, the Legal Services Authorities Act was enacted by the Parliament which came into force on 9th November, 1995 to establish a nationwide uniform network for providing free and competent legal services to the weaker sections of the society on the basis of equal opportunity. The National Legal Services Authority (NALSA) has been constituted under the Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987 to monitor and evaluate implementation of legal aid programmes and to lay down policies and principles for making legal services available under the Act.

In every State, a State Legal Services Authority and in every High Court, a High Court Legal Services Committee have been constituted. The District Legal Services Authorities, Taluk Legal Services Committees have been constituted in the Districts and most of the Taluks to give effect to the policies and directions of the NALSA and to provide free legal services to the people and conduct Lok Adalats in the State.

The Supreme Court Legal Services Committee has been constituted to administer and implement the legal services programme insofar as it relates to the Supreme Court of India. The NALSA lays down policies, principles, guidelines and frames effective and economical schemes for the State Legal Services Authorities to implement the Legal Services Programmes throughout the country.

Primarily, the State Legal Services Authorities, District Legal Services Authorities, Taluk Legal Services Committees, etc. have been asked to discharge the following main functions on regular basis:
1. To provide free and competent legal services to the eligible persons.
2. To organise Lok Adalats for amicable settlement of disputes.
3. To organise legal awareness camps in the rural areas. The free legal services include:
(a) Payment of court fee, process fees and all other charges payable or incurred in connection with any legal proceedings.
(b) Providing service of lawyers in legal proceedings.
(c) Obtaining and supply of certified copies of orders and other documents in legal proceedings.
(d) Preparation of appeal, paper book including printing and translation of documents in legal proceedings.
The persons eligible for getting free legal services include:
(i) Women and children
(ii) Members of SC/ST
(iii) Industrial workmen
(iv) Victims of mass disaster, violence, f lood, drought, earthquake, industrial disaster
(v) Disabled persons
(vi) Persons in custody
(vii) Persons whose annual income does not exceed Rs. 1 lakh (in the Supreme Court Legal Services Committee the limit Rs. 1,25,000/-)
(viii) Victims of trafficking in human beings or begar.

LOK ADALATS:
The Lok Adalat is a forum where the cases (or disputes) which are pending in a court or which are at pre-litigation stage (not yet brought before a court) are compromised or settled in an amicable manner.

Meaning of Lok Adalat:
The Supreme Court has explained the meaning of the institution of Lok Adalat in the following way:
The ‘Lok Adalat’ is an old form of adjudicating system prevailed in ancient India and it’s validity has not been taken away even in the modern days too. The word ‘Lok Adalat’ means ‘People’s Court’. This system is based on Gandhian principles. It is one of the components of ADR (Alternative Dispute Resolution) system. As the Indian courts are overburdened with the backlog of cases and the regular courts are to decide the cases involving a lengthy, expensive and tedious procedure. The court takes years together to settle even petty cases. The Lok Adalat, therefore, provides alternative resolution or devise for expeditious and inexpensive justice.
In Lok Adalat proceedings, there are no victors and vanquished and, thus, no rancour.
The experiment of ‘Lok Adalat’ as an alternate mode of dispute settlement has come to be accepted in India, as a viable, economic, efficient and informal one.
The Lok Adalat is another alternative in judicial justice. This is a recent strategy for delivering informal, cheap and expeditious justice to the common man by way of settling disputes, which are pending in courts and also those, which have not yet reached courts by negotiation, conciliation and by adopting persuasive, common sense and human approach to the problems of the disputants, with the assistance of specially trained and experienced members of a team of conciliators.

Statutory Status:
The first Lok Adalat camp in the postindependence era was organised in Gujarat in 1982. This initiative proved very successful in the settlement of disputes. Consequently, the institution of Lok Adalat started spreading to other parts of the country. At that time, this institution was functioning as a voluntary and conciliatory agency without any statutory backing for its decisions. In view of its growing popularity, there arose a demand for providing a statutory backing to this institution and the awards given by Lok Adalats. Hence, the institution of Lok Adalat has been given statutory status under the Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987.
The Act makes the following provisions relating to the organisation and functioning of the Lok Adalats:
1. The State Legal Services Authority or the District Legal Services Authority or the Supreme Court Legal Services Committee or the High Court Legal Services Committee or the Taluk Legal Services Committee may organise Lok Adalats at such intervals and places and for exercising such jurisdiction and for such areas as it thinks fit.
2. Every Lok Adalat organised for an area shall consist of such number of serving or retired judicial officers and other persons of the area as may be specified by the agency organizing such Lok Adalat. Generally, a Lok Adalat consists of a judicial officer as the chairman and a lawyer (advocate) and a social worker as members.
3. A Lok Adalat shall have jurisdiction to determine and to arrive at a compromise or settlement between the parties to a dispute in respect of:
(i) any case pending before any court; or
(ii) any matter which is falling within the jurisdiction of any court an not brought before such court.
Thus, the Lok Adalat can deal with not only the cases pending before a court but also with the disputes at pre-litigation stage. The various matters such as Matri-monial/Family Disputes, Criminal (Compoundable Offences) cases, Land Acquisition cases, Labour disputes, Workmen’s compensation cases, Bank Recovery cases, Pension cases, Housing Board and Slum Clearance cases, Housing Finance cases, Consumer Grievance cases, Electricity matters, Disputes relating to Telephone Bills, Municipal matters including House Tax cases, Disputes with Cellular Companies etc. are being taken up in the Lok Adalats.7a But, the Lok Adalat shall have no jurisdiction in respect of any case or matter relating to an offence not compoundable under any law. In other words, the offences which are non- compoundable under any law fall outside the purview of the Lok Adalat.
4. Any case pending before the court can be referred to the Lok Adalat for settlement if:
(i) the parties thereof agree to settle the dispute in the Lok Adalat
(ii) one of the parties thereof makes an application to the court referring the case to the Lok Adalat; or
(iii) the court is satisfied that the matter is an appropriate one to taken cognizance of by the Lok Adalat.
In the case of a pre-litigation dispute, the matter can be referred to the Lok Adalat for settlement by the agency organizing the Lok Adalat, on receipt of an application from any one of the parties to the dispute.
5. The Lok Adalat shall have the same powers as are vested in a Civil Court under the Code of Civil Procedure (1908), while trying a suit in respect of the following matters:
(a) the summoning and enforcing the attendance of any witness examining him on oath;
(b) the discovery and production of any document;
(c) the reception of evidence on affidavits;
(d) the requisitioning of any public record or document from any court or office; and
(e) such other matters as may be prescribed.
Further, a Lok Adalat shall have the requisite powers to specify its own procedure for the determination of any dispute coming before it. Also, all proceedings before a Lok Adalat shall be deemed to be judicial proceedings within the meaning of the Indian Penal Code (1860) and every Lok Adalat shall be deemed to be a Civil Court for the purpose of the Code of Criminal Procedure (1973).
6. An award of a Lok Adalat shall be deemed to be a decree of a Civil Court or an order of any other court. Every award made by a Lok Adalat shall be final and binding on all the parties to the dispute. No appeal shall lie to any court against the award of the Lok Adalat.

Benefits of Lok Adalat:
According to the Supreme Court, the benefits under Lok Adalat are as follows:
1. There is no court fee and if court fee is already paid the amount will be refunded if the dispute is settled at Lok Adalat.
2. The basic features of Lok Adalat are the procedural f lexibility and speedy trial of the disputes. There is no strict application of procedural laws like the Civil Procedure Code and the Evidence Act while assessing the claim by Lok Adalat.
3. The parties to the dispute can directly interact with the judge through their counsel which is not possible in regular courts of law.
4. The award by the Lok Adalat is binding on the parties and it has the status of a decree of a civil court and it is non-appealable,  which does not cause the delay in the settlement of disputes finally.
In view of above facilities provided by the Act, Lok Adalats are boon to the litigating public as they can get their disputes settled fast and free of cost amicably. The Law Commission of India summarized the advantages of ADR (Alternative Dispute Resolution) in the following way:
1. It is less expensive.
2. It is less time-consuming.
3. It is free from technicalities vis-a-vis conducting of cases in law courts.
4. Parties are free to discuss their differences of opinion without any fear of disclosure before any law courts.
5. Parties have the feeling that there is no losing or winning side between them but at the same time their grievance is redressed and their relationship is restored.

PERMANENT LOK ADALATS:
The Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987 was amended in 2002 to provide for the establishment of the Permanent Lok Adalats to deal with cases pertaining to the public utility services. 

REASONS FOR THE ESTABLISHMENT OF PERMANENT LOK ADALATS:
The reasons for the establishment of Permanent Lok Adalats are as follows:
1. The Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987 was enacted to constitute legal services authorities for providing free and competent legal services to the weaker sections of the society to ensure that opportunities for securing justice were not denied to any citizen by reason of economic or other disabilities and to organise Lok Adalats to ensure that the operation of the legal system promotes justice on a basis of equal opportunity.
2. The system of Lok Adalat, which is an innovative mechanism for alternate dispute resolution, has proved effective for resolving disputes in a spirit of conciliation outside the courts.
3. However, the major drawback in the existing scheme of organization of the Lok Adalats under the said Act is that the system of Lok Adalats is mainly based on compromise or settlement between the parties. If the parties do not arrive at any compromise or settlement, the case is either returned to the court of law or the parties are advised to seek remedy in a court of law. This causes unnecessary delay in the dispensation of justice. If Lok Adalats are given power to decide the cases on merits in case parties fails to arrive at any compromise or settlement, this problem can be tackled to a great extent.  
4. Further, the cases which arise in relation to public utility services such as Mahanagar Telephone Nigam Limited, Delhi Vidyut Board, etc., need to be settled urgently so that people get justice without delay even at pre-litigation stage and thus most of the petty cases which ought not to go in the regular courts would be settled at the pre-litigation stage itself which would result in reducing the workload of the regular courts to a great extent.
5. It is, therefore, proposed to amend the Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987 to set up Permanent Lok Adalats for providing compulsory pre-litigative mechanism for conciliation and settlement of cases relating to public utility services.

Features of Permanent Lok Adalats:
The salient features of the new institution of Permanent Lok Adalats are as follows:
1. The Permanent Lok Adalat shall consist of a Chairman who is or has been a district judge or additional district judge or has held judicial office higher in rank than that of the district judge and two other persons having adequate experience in public utility services.
2. The Permanent Lok Adalat shall exercise jurisdiction in respect of one or more public utility services such as transport services of passengers or goods by air, road and water; postal, telegraph or telephone services; supply of power, light or water to the public by any establishment; public conservancy or sanitation; services in hospitals or dispensaries; and insurance services.
3. The pecuniary jurisdiction of the Permanent Lok Adalat shall be up to rupees ten lakhs. However, the Central Government may increase the said pecuniary jurisdiction from time to time.
4. The Permanent Lok Adalat shall have not jurisdiction in respect of any matter relating to an offence not compoundable under any law.
5. Before the dispute is brought before any court, any party to the dispute may make an application to the Permanent Lok Adalat for settlement of the dispute. After an application is made to the Permanent Lok Adalat, no party to that application shall invoke jurisdiction of any court in the same dispute.
6. Where it appears to the Permanent Lok Adalat that there exist elements of a settlement, which may be acceptable to the parties, it shall formulate the terms of a possible settlement and submit them to the parties for their observations and in case the parties reach an agreement, the Permanent Lok Adalat shall pass an award in terms thereof. In case parties to the dispute fail to reach an agreement, the Permanent Lok Adalat shall decide the dispute on merits.
7. Every award made by the Permanent Lok Adalat shall be final and binding on all the parties thereto and shall be by a majority of the persons constituting the Permanent Lok Adalat.

FAMILY COURTS:
The Family Courts Act, 1984 was enacted to provide for the establishment of Family Courts with a view to promote conciliation and secure speedy settlement of disputes relating to marriage and family affairs.

Reasons for the establishment of separate Family Courts:
The reasons for the establishment of separate Family Courts are as follows:
1. Several associations of women, other organizations and individuals have urged, from time to time, that Family Courts, be set up for the settlement of family disputes, where emphasis should be laid on conciliation and achieving socially desirable results and adherence to rigid rules of procedure and evidence should be eliminated.
2. The Law Commission in its 59th report (1974) had also stressed that in dealing with disputes concerning the family the Court ought to adopt an approach radically different from the adopted in ordinary civil proceedings and that it should make reasonable efforts at settlement before the commencement of the trial. The Code of Civil Procedure was amended in 1976 to provide for a special procedure to be adopted in suits or proceedings relating to matters concerning the family.
3. However, not much use has been made by the Courts in adopting this conciliatory procedure and the Courts continue to deal with family disputes in the same manner as other civil matters and the same adversary approach prevails. The need was, therefore, felt, in the public interest, to establish Family Courts for speedy settlement of family disputes.
Therefore, the main objectives and reasons for setting up of Family Courts are:
(i) To create a Specialized Court which will exclusively deal with family matters so that such a court may have the necessary expertise to deal with these cases expeditiously. Thus expertise and expeditious disposal are two main factors for establish such a court;
(ii) To institute a mechanism for conciliation of the disputes relating family;
(iii) To provide an inexpensive remedy; and
(iv) To have flexibility and an informal atmosphere in the conducting proceedings.

The salient features of the Family Courts Act, 1984 are as follows:
1. It provides for the establishment of Family Courts by the State Governments in consultation with the High Courts.
2. It makes it obligatory on the State Governments to set up a Family Court in every city or town with a population exceeding one million.
3. It enables the State Governments to set up Family Courts in other areas also, if they deem it necessary.
4. It exclusively provides within the jurisdiction of the Family Courts the matters relating to:
(i) matrimonial relief, including nullity of marriage, judicial separated divorce, restitution of conjugal rights, or declaration as to validity of marriage or as to the matrimonial status of any person
(ii) the property of the spouses or of either of them;
(iii) declaration as to the legitimacy of any person;
(iv) guardianship of a person or the custody of any minor; and
(v) maintenance of wife, children and parents.
5. It makes it obligatory on the part of the Family Court to endeavour, in the first instance to effect a reconciliation or a settlement between the parties to a family dispute. During this stage, the proceedings will be informal and rigid rules of procedure shall not apply.
6. It provides for the association of social welfare agencies, counsellors, etc., during conciliation stage and also to secure the service of medical and welfare experts.
7. It provides that the parties to a dispute before a Family Court shall not be entitled, as of right, to be represented by legal practitioner. However, the Court may, in the interest of justice, seek assistance of a legal expert as amicus curiae.
8. It simplifies the rules of evidence and procedure so as to enable a Family Court to deal effectively with a dispute.
9. It provides for only one right of appeal which shall lie to the High Court.

GRAM NYAYALAYAS:
The Gram Nyayalayas Act, 2008 has been enacted to provide for the establishment of the Gram Nyayalayas at the grass roots level for the purposes of providing access to justice to the citizens at their doorsteps and to ensure that opportunities for securing justice are not denied to any citizen due to social, economic or other disabilities.

The reasons for the establishment of Gram Nyayalayas are as follows:
1. Access to justice by the poor and disadvantaged remains a worldwide problem despite diverse approaches and strategies that have been formulated and implemented to address it. In our country, Article 39A of the Constitution directs the State to secure that the operation of the legal system promotes justice, on a basis of equal opportunity and shall provide free legal aid to ensure that opportunities for securing justice are not denied to any citizen by reason of economic or other disabilities.
2. In the recent past, the Government has taken various measures to strengthen judicial system, inter alia, by simplifying the procedural laws; incorporating various alternative dispute resolution mechanisms such as arbitration, conciliation and mediation; conducting of Lok Adalats, etc. These measures are required to be strengthened further.
3. The Law Commission of India in its 114th Report on Gram Nyayalaya suggested establishment of Gram Nyayalayas so that speedy, inexpensive and substantial justice could be provided to the common man. The Gram Nyayalayas Act, 2008 is broadly based on the recommendations of the Law Commission.
4. Justice to the poor at their door step is a dream of the poor. Setting up of Gram Nyayalayas in the rural areas would bring to the people of rural areas speedy, affordable and substantial justice. 

The salient features of the Gram Nyayalayas Act are as follows:
1. The Gram Nyayalaya shall be court of Judicial Magistrate of the first class and its presiding officer (Nyayadhikari) shall be appointed by the State Government in consultation with the High Court.
2. The Gram Nyayalaya shall be established for every Panchayat at intermediate level or a group of contiguous Panchayats at intermediate level in a district or where there is no Panchayat at intermediate level in any State, for a group of contiguous Panchayats.
3. The Nyayadhikaris who will preside over these Gram Nyayalayas are strictly judicial officers and will be drawing the same salary, deriving the same powers as First Class Magistrates working under High Courts.
4. The Gram Nyayalaya shall be a mobile court and shall exercise the powers of both Criminal and Civil Courts.
5. The seat of the Gram Nyayalaya will be located at the headquarters of the intermediate Panchayat, they will go to villages, work there and dispose of the cases.
6. The Gram Nyayalaya shall try criminal cases, civil suits, claims or disputes which are specified in the First Schedule and the Second Schedule to the Act.
7. The Central as well as the State Governments have been given power to amend the First Schedule and the Second Schedule of the Act, as per their respective legislative competence.
8. The Gram Nyayalaya shall follow summary procedure in criminal trial.
9. The Gram Nyayalaya shall exercise the powers of a Civil Court with certain modifications and shall follow the special procedure as provided in the Act.
10. The Gram Nyayalaya shall try to settle the disputes as far as possible by bringing about conciliation between the parties and for this purpose, it shall make use of the conciliators to be appointed for this purpose.
11. The judgment and order passed by the Gram Nyayalaya shall be deemed to be a decree and to avoid delay in its execution, the Gram Nyayalaya shall follow summary procedure for its execution.
12. The Gram Nyayalaya shall not be bound by the rules of evidence provided in the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 but shall be guided by the principles of natural justice and subject to any rule made by the High Court.
13. Appeal in criminal cases shall lie to the Court of Session, which shall be heard and disposed of within a period of six months from the date of filing of such appeal.
14. Appeal in civil cases shall lie to the District Court, which shall be heard and disposed of within a period of six months from the date of filing of the appeal.
15. A person accused of an offence may file an application for plea bargaining.

Establishment of Gram Nyayalayas:
The Central Government has decided to meet the non-recurring expenditure on the establishment of these Gram Nyayalayas subject to a ceiling of Rs. 18.00 lakhs out of which Rs. 10.00 lakhs is for construction of the court, Rs. 5.00 lakhs for vehicle and Rs. 3.00 lakhs for office equipment.
More than 5000 Gram Nyayalayas are expected to be set up under the Act for which the Central Government would provide about Rs. 1400 crores by way of assistance to the concerned States/Union Territories. Under of the Gram Nyayalayas Act, 2008, it is for the State Governments to establish Gram Nyayalayas in consultation with the respective High Courts.
Majority of States have now set up regular courts at Taluka level. Further, reluctance of police officials and other State functionaries to invoke jurisdiction of Gram Nyayalayas, lukewarm response of the Bar, non-availability of notaries and stamp vendors, problem of concurrent jurisdiction of regular courts are other issues indicated by the States which are coming in the way of operationalization of the Gram Nyayalayas.
The issues affecting operationalization of the Gram Nyayalayas were discussed in the Conference of Chief Justices of High Courts and Chief Ministers of the States in April, 2013. It was decided in the Conference that the State Government and High Court should decide the question of establishment of Gram Nyayalayas wherever feasible, taking into account their local problems. The focus is on setting up Gram Nayayalayas in the Talukas where regular courts have not been set up.

Special Provisions for Some States:
Articles 371 to 371-J in Part XXI of the constitution contain special provisions for twelve states1 viz., Maharashtra, Gujarat, Nagaland, Assam, Manipur, Andhra Pradesh, Telangana, Sikkim, Mizoram, Arunachal Pradesh, Goa and Karnataka. The intention behind them is to meet the aspirations of the people of backward regions of the states or to protect the cultural and economic interests of the tribal people of the states or to deal with the disturbed law and order condition in some parts of the states or to protect the interests of the local people of the states. Originally, the constitution did not make any special provisions for these states. They have been incorporated by the various subsequent amendments made in the context of reorganisation of the states or conferment of statehood on the Union Territories.

PROVISIONS FOR MAHARASHTRA AND GUJARAT:
Under Article 371, the President is authorised to provide that the Governor of Maharashtra and that of Gujarat would have special responsibility for:
1. the establishment of separate development boards for 
(i) Vidarbha, Marathwada and the rest of Maharashtra, 
(ii) Saurashtra, Kutch and the rest of Gujarat;
2. making a provision that a report on the working of these boards would be placed every year before the State Legislative Assembly;
3. the equitable allocation of funds for developmental expenditure over the above-mentioned areas; and
4. an equitable arrangement providing adequate facilities for technical education and vocational training, and adequate employment opportunities in the state services in respect of the abovementioned areas.

PROVISIONS FOR NAGALAND:
Article 371-A makes the following special provisions for Nagaland3 :
1. The Acts of Parliament relating to the following matters would not apply to Nagaland unless the State Legislative Assembly so decides:
(i) religious or social practices of the Nagas;
(ii) Naga customary law and procedure;
(iii) administration of civil and criminal justice involving decision according to Naga customary law; and
(iv) ownership and transfer of land and its resources.
2. The Governor of Nagaland shall have special responsibility for law and order in the state so long as internal disturbances caused by the hostile Nagas continue. In the discharge of this responsibility, the Governor, after consulting the Council of Ministers, exercises his individual judgement and his decision is final. This special responsibility of the Governor shall cease when the President so directs.
3. The Governor has to ensure that the money provided by the Central Government for any specific purpose is included in the demand for a grant relating to that purpose and not in any other demand moved in the State Legislative Assembly.
4. A regional council consisting of 35 members should be established for the Tuensang district of the state. The Governor should make rules for the composition of the council, manner of choosing its members, their qualifications, term, salaries and allowances; the procedure and conduct of business of the council; the appointment of officers and staff of the council and their service conditions; and any other matter relating to the constitution and proper functioning of the council.
5. For a period of ten years from the formation of Nagaland or for such further period as the Governor may specify on the recommendation of the regional council, the following provisions would be operative for the Tuensang district:
(i) The administration of the Tuensang district shall be carried on the Governor.
(ii) The Governor shall in his discretion arrange for equal distribution of money provided by the Centre between Tuens district and the rest of Nagaland.
(iii) Any Act of Nagaland Legislature shall not apply to Tuens district unless the Governor so directs on the recommendatio the regional council.
(iv) The Governor can make Regulations for the peace, progress good government of the Tuensang district. Any such Regula may repeal or amend an Act of Parliament or any other applicable to that district.
(v) There shall be a Minister for Tuensang affairs in the Council of Ministers. He is to be appointed from amongst members representing Tuensang district in the Nagal
Legislative Assembly.
(vi) The final decision on all matters relating to Tuensang district be made by the Governor in his discretion.
(vii) Members in the Nagaland Legislative Assembly from Tuensang district are not elected directly by the people but by regional council.

PROVISIONS FOR ASSAM AND MANIPUR:
Assam:
Under Article 371-B6 , the President is empowered to provide for the creation of a committee of the Assam Legislative Assembly consisting of the members elected from the Tribal Areas of the state and such other members as he may specify.
Manipur:
Article 371-C makes the following special provisions for Manipur: 1. The President is authorized to provide for the creation of a committee of the Manipur Legislative Assembly consisting of the members elected from the Hill Areas of the state.
2. The President can also direct that the Governor shall have special responsibility to secure the proper functioning of that committee.
3. The Governor should submit an annual report to the President regarding the administration of the Hill Areas.
4. The Central Government can give directions to the State Government as to the administration of the Hill Areas.

PROVISIONS FOR ANDHRA PRADESH OR TELANGANA:
Articles 371-D and 371-E contain the special provisions for Andhra Pradesh10. In 2014, Article 371-D has been extended to the state of Telangana by the Andhra Pradesh Re-organisation Act of 2014. Under Article 371-D, the following are mentioned:
1. The President is empowered to provide for equitable opportunities and facilities for the people belonging to different parts of the state in the matter of public employment and education and different provisions can be made for various parts of the state.
2. For the above purpose, the President may require the State Government to organise civil posts in local cadres for different parts of the state and provide for direct recruitment to posts in any local cadre. He may specify parts of the state which shall be regarded as the local area for admission to any educational institution. He may also specify the extent and manner of preference or reservation given in the matter of direct recruitment to posts in any such cadre or admission to any such educational institution.
3. The President may provide for the establishment of an Administrative Tribunal in the state to deal with certain disputes and grievances relating to appointment, allotment or promotion to civil posts in the state11. The tribunal is to function outside the purview of the state High Court. No court (other than the Supreme Court) is to exercise any jurisdiction in respect of any matter subject to the jurisdiction of the tribunal. The President may abolish the tribunal when he is satisfied that its continued existence is not necessary.
Article 371-E empowers the Parliament to provide for the establishment of a Central University in the state of Andhra Pradesh.

PROVISIONS FOR SIKKIM:
The 36th Constitutional Amendment Act of 1975 made Sikkim a fullfledged state of the Indian Union. It included a new Article 371-F containing special provisions with respect to Sikkim. These are as follows:
1. The Sikkim Legislative Assembly is to consist of not less than 30 members.
2. One seat is allotted to Sikkim in the Lok Sabha and Sikkim forms one Parliamentary constituency.
3. For the purpose of protecting the rights and interests of the different sections of the Sikkim population, the Parliament is empowered to provide for the:
(i) number of seats in the Sikkim Legislative Assembly which may filled by candidates belonging to such sections; and
(ii) delimitation of the Assembly constituencies from which candidates belonging to such sections alone may stand for election to Assembly.
4. The Governor shall have special responsibility for peace and for an equitable arrangement for ensuring the social and economic advancement of the different sections of the Sikkim population. In the discharge of this responsibility, the Governor shall act in his discretion, subject to the directions issued by the President.
5. The President can extend (with restrictions or modifications) to Sikkim any law which is in force in a state of the Indian Union.

PROVISIONS FOR MIZORAM:
Article 371-G specifies the following special provisions for Mizoram:
1. The Acts of Parliament relating to the following matters would not apply to Mizoram unless the State Legislative Assembly so decides:
(i) religious or social practices of the Mizos;
(ii) Mizo customary law and procedure;
(iii) administration of civil and criminal justice involving decision according to Mizo customary law; and
(iv) ownership and transfer of land.
2. The Mizoram Legislative Assembly is to consist of not less than 40 members.

PROVISIONS FOR ARUNACHAL PRADESH AND GOA:
Arunachal Pradesh:
Under Article 371-H, the following special provisions are made for Arunachal Pradesh :
1. The Governor of Arunachal Pradesh shall have special responsibility for law and order in the state. In the discharge of this responsibility, the Governor, after consulting the Council of Ministers, exercises his individual judgement and his decision is final. This special responsibility of the Governor shall cease when the President so directs.
2. The Arunachal Pradesh Legislative Assembly is to consist of not less than 30 members.

Goa:
Article 371-I provides that the Goa Legislative Assembly is to consist of not less than 30 members.

PROVISIONS FOR KARNATAKA:
Under Article 371-J, the President is empowered to provide that the Governor of Karnataka would have special responsibility for
1. The establishment of a separate development board for Hyderabad-Karnataka region
2. Making a provision that a report on the working of the board would be placed every year before the State Legislative Assembly
3. The equitable allocation of funds for developmental expenditure over the region
4. The reservation of seats in educational and vocational training institutions in the region for students who belong to the region
5. The reservation in state government posts in the region for persons who belong to the region Article 371-J (which provided for special provisions for the Hyderabad-Karnataka region of the state of Karnataka) was inserted in the Constitution by the 98th Constitutional Amendment Act of 2012.
The special provisions aim to establish an institutional mechanism for equitable allocation of funds to meet the development needs over the region, as well as to enhance human resources and promote employment from the region by providing for local cadres in service and reservation in educational and vocational training institutions.
In 2010, the Legislative Assembly as well as the Legislative Council of Karnataka passed separate resolutions seeking special provisions for the Hyderabad-Karnataka region of the state of Karnataka. The government of Karnataka also endorsed the need for special provisions for the region. The resolutions sought to accelerate development of the most backward region of the state and promote inclusive growth with a view to reducing inter-district and inter-regional disparities in the state.

Panchayati Raj:
The term Panchayati Raj in India signifies the system of rural local selfgovernment. It has been established in all the states of India by the Acts of the state legislatures to build democracy at the grass root level1. It is entrusted with rural development. It was constitutionalised through the 73rd Constitutional Amendment Act of 1992.

EVOLUTION OF PANCHAYATI RAJ:
Balwant Rai Mehta Committee:
In January 1957, the Government of India appointed a committee to examine the working of the Community Development Programme (1952) and the National Extension Service (1953) and to suggest measures for their better working. The chairman of this committee was Balwant Rai G Mehta. The committee submitted its report in November 1957 and recommended the establishment of the scheme of ‘democratic decentralisation’, which ultimately came to be known as Panchayati Raj. The specific recommendations made by it are:
1. Establishment of a three-tier panchayati raj system–gram panchayat at the village level, panchayat samiti at the block level and zila parishad at the district level. These tiers should be organically linked through a device of indirect elections.
2. The village panchayat should be constituted with directly elected representatives, whereas the panchayat samiti and zila parishad should be constituted with indirectly elected members.
3. All planning and development activities should be entrusted to these bodies.
4. The panchayat samiti should be the executive body while the zila parishad should be the advisory, coordinating and supervisory body.
5. The district collector should be the chairman of the zila parishad.
6. There should be a genuine transfer of power and responsibility to these democratic bodies.
7. Adequate resources should be transferred to these bodies to enable them to discharge their functions and fulfil their responsibilities.
8. A system should be evolved to effect further devolution of authority in future.

These recommendations of the committee were accepted by the National Development Council in January 1958. The council did not insist on a single rigid pattern and left it to the states to evolve their own patterns suitable to local conditions. But the basic principles and broad fundamentals should be identical throughout the country. Rajasthan was the first state to establish Panchayati Raj. The scheme was inaugurated by the prime minister on October 2, 1959, in Nagaur district. Rajasthan was followed by Andhra Pradesh, which also adopted the system in 1959. Thereafter, most of the states adopted the system.
Though most of the states created panchayati raj institutions by mid 1960s, there were differences from one state to another with regard to the number of tiers, relative position of samiti and parishad, their tenure, composition, functions, finances and so on. For example, Rajasthan adopted the three-tier system while Tamil Nadu adopted the two-tier system. West Bengal, on the other hand, adopted the four-tier system. Further, in the Rajasthan-Andhra Pradesh pattern, panchayat samiti was powerful as the block was the unit of planning and development, while in Maharashtra-Gujarat pattern, zila parishad was powerful as the district was the unit of planning and development. Some states also established nyaya panchayats, that is, judicial panchayats to try petty civil and criminal cases.

Ashok Mehta Committee:
In December 1977, the Janata Government appointed a committee on panchayati raj institutions under the chairmanship of Ashok Mehta. It submitted its report in August 1978 and made 132 recommendations to revive and strengthen the declining panchayati raj system in the country. Its main recommendations were:
1. The three-tier system of panchayati raj should be replaced by the two-tier system, that is, zila parishad at the district level, and below it, the mandal panchayat consisting of a group of villages with a total population of 15,000 to 20,000.
2. A district should be the first point for decentralisation under popular supervision below the state level.
3. Zila parishad should be the executive body and made responsible for planning at the district level.
4. There should be an official participation of political parties at all levels of panchayat elections.
5. The panchayati raj institutions should have compulsory powers of taxation to mobilise their own financial resources.
6. There should be a regular social audit by a district level agency and by a committee of legislators to check whether the funds allotted for the vulnerable social and economic groups are actually spent on them.
7. The state government should not supersede the panchayati raj institutions. In case of an imperative supersession, elections should be held within six months from the date of supersession.
8. The nyaya panchayats should be kept as separate bodies from that of development panchayats. They should be presided over by a qualified judge.
9. The chief electoral officer of a state in consultation with the chief election commissioner should organise and conduct the panchayati raj elections.
10. Development functions should be transferred to the zila parishad and all development staff should work under its control and supervision.
11. The voluntary agencies should play an important role in mobilising the support of the people for panchayati raj.
12. A minister for panchayati raj should be appointed in the state council of ministers to look after the affairs of the panchayati raj institutions.
13. Seats for SCs and STs should be reserved on the basis of their population.
14. A constitutional recognition should be accorded to the Panchayati Raj institutions. This would give them the requisite status (sanctity and stature) and an assurance of continuous functioning.
Due to the collapse of the Janata Government before the completion of its term, no action could be taken on the recommendations of the Ashok Mehta Committee at the central level. However, the three states of Karnataka, West Bengal and Andhra Pradesh took steps to revitalise the panchayati raj, keeping in view some of the recommendations of the Ashok Mehta Committee.

G.V.K. Rao Committee:
The Committee to review the existing Administrative Arrangements for Rural Development and Poverty Alleviation Programmes under the chairmanship of G.V.K. Rao was appointed by the Planning Commission in 1985. The Committee came to conclusion that the developmental process was gradually bureaucratised and divorced from the Panchayati Raj. This phenomena of bureaucratisation of development administration as against the democratisation weakened the Panchayati Raj institutions resulting in what is aptly called as ‘grass without roots’. Hence, the Committee made the following recommendations to strengthen and revitalise the Panchayati Raj system:
(i) The district level body, that is, the Zila Parishad should be of pivotal importance in the scheme of democratic decentralisation. It stated that “the district is the proper unit for planning and development and the Zila Parishad should become the principal body for management of all development programmes which can be handled at that level.”
(ii) The Panchayati Raj institutions at the district and lower levels should be assigned an important role with respect to planning, implementation and monitoring of rural development programmes.
(iii) Some of the planning functions at the state level should be transferred to the district level planning units for effective decentralized district planning.
(iv) A post of District Development Commissioner should be created. He should act as the chief executive officer of the Zila Parishad and should be in charge of all the development departments at the district level.
(v) Elections to the Panchayati Raj institutions should be held regularly. It found that elections became overdue for one or more tiers in 11 states.

Thus the committee, in its scheme of decentralised system of field administration, assigned a leading role to the Panchayati Raj in local planning and development. It is in this respect that the recommendation of the G.V.K. Rao Committee Report (1986) differed from those of the Dantwala Committee Report on Block-Level Planning (1978) and the Hanumantha Rao Committee Report on District Planning (1984). Both the committees have suggested that the basic decentralised planning function should be done at the district level. The Hanumantha Rao Committee advocated separate district planning bodies under either the District Collector or a minister. In both the models, the Collector should play a significant role in the decentralised planning though the Committee stated that Panchayati Raj institutions would also be associated with this process (of decentralised planning). The committee recommended that the Collector should be the coordinator, at the district level, of all developmental and planning activities. Thus the, Hanumantha Rao Committee differed in this respect from those of Balwantray Mehta Committee, the Administrative Reforms Commission of India, the Ashok Mehta Committee and finally the G.V.K. Rao Committee which recommended reduction in the developmental role of the District Collector and which assigned a major role to the Panchayati Raj in development administration.

L M Singhvi Committee:
In 1986, Rajiv Gandhi government appointed a committee to prepare a concept paper on ‘Revitalisation of Panchayati Raj Institutions for Democracy and Development’ under the chairmanship of L.M. Singhvi. It made the following recommendations.
(i) The Panchayati Raj institutions should be constitutionally recognised, protected and preserved. For this purpose, a new chapter should be added in the Constitution of India. This will make their identity and integrity reasonably and substantially inviolate. It also suggested constitutional provisions to ensure regular, free and fair elections to the Panchayati Raj bodies.
(ii) Nyaya Panchayats should be established for a cluster of villages.
(iii) The villages should be reorganised to make Gram Panchayats more viable. It also emphasised the importance of the Gram Sabha and called it as the embodiment of direct democracy.
(iv) The Village Panchayats should have more financial resources.
(v) The judicial tribunals should be established in each state to adjudicate controversies about election to the Panchayati Raj institutions, their dissolution and other matters related to their functioning.

Thungon Committee:
In 1988, a sub-committee of the Consultative Committee of Parliament was constituted under the chairmanship of P.K. Thungon to examine the political and administrative structure in the district for the purpose of district planning. This committee suggested for the strengthening of the Panchayati Raj system. It made the following recommendations:
1. The Panchayati Raj bodies should be constitutionally recognized.
2. A three-tier system of Panchayati Raj with panchayats at the village, block and district levels.
3. Zilla Parishad should be the pivot of the Panchayati Raj system. It should act as the planning and development agency in the district.
4. The Panchayati Raj bodies should have a fixed tenure of five years.
5. The maximum period of super session of a body should be six months.
6. A planning and co-ordination committee should be set-up at the state level under the chairmanship of the minister for planning. The presidents of Zilla Parishads should be its members.
7. A detailed list of subjects for Panchayati Raj should be prepared and incorporated in the Constitution.
8. Reservation of seats in all the three-tiers should be on the basis of population. There should also be reservation for women.
9. A state finance commission should be set-up in each state. It would lay down the criteria and guidelines for the devolution of finances to the Panchayati Raj institutions.
10. The district collector should be the chief executive officer of the Zilla Parishad.

Gadgil Committee:
The Committee on Policy and Programmes was constituted in 1988 by the Congress party under the chairmanship of V.N. Gadgil. This committee was asked to consider the question of “how best Panchayati Raj institutions could be made effective”. In this context, the committee made the following recommendations:
1. A constitutional status should be bestowed on the Panchayati Raj institutions.
2. A three-tier system of Panchayati Raj with panchayats at the village, block and district levels.
3. The term of Panchayati Raj institutions should be fixed at five years.
4. The members of the Panchayats at all the three levels should be directly elected.
5. Reservation for SCs, STs and women.
6. The Panchayati Raj bodies should have the responsibility of preparation and implementation of plans for socioeconomic development. For this purpose, a list of subjects should be specified in the constitution.
7. The Panchayat Raj bodies should be empowered to levy, collect and appropriate taxes and duties.
8. Establishment of a State Finance Commission for the allocation of finances to the Panchayats.
9. Establishment of a State Election Commission for the conduction of elections to the panchayats.
The above recommendations of the Gadgil Committee became the basis for drafting an amendment bill aimed at conferring the constitutional status and protection to the Panchayati Raj institutions.

Constitutionalisation of Panchayati Raj institutions by Rajiv Gandhi Government:
The Rajiv Gandhi Government introduced the 64th Constitutional Amendment Bill in the Lok Sabha in July 1989 to constitutionalise panchayati raj institutions and make them more powerful and broad based. Although, the Lok Sabha passed the bill in August 1989, it was not approved by the Rajya Sabha. The bill was vehemently opposed by the Opposition on the ground that it sought to strengthen centralisation in the federal system.

Constitutionalisation of Panchayati Raj institutions by V.P. Singh Government:
The National Front Government, soon after assuming office in November 1989 under the Prime Ministership of V.P. Singh, announced that it would take steps to strengthen the panchayati raj institutions. In June 1990, a two-day conference of the state chief ministers under the chairmanship of V.P. Singh was held to discuss the issues relating to the strengthening of the panchayati raj bodies. The conference approved the proposals for the introduction of a fresh constitutional amendment bill. Consequently, a constitutional amendment bill was introduced in the Lok Sabha in September 1990. However, the fall of the government resulted in the lapse of the bill. 

Constitutionalisation of Panchayati Raj institutions by Narasimha Rao Government:
The Congress Government under the prime ministership of P.V. Narasimha Rao once again considered the matter of the constitutionalisation of panchayati raj bodies. It drastically modified the proposals in this regard to delete the controversial aspects and introduced a constitutional amendment bill in the Lok Sabha in September, 1991. This bill finally emerged as the 73rd Constitutional Amendment Act, 1992 and came into force on 24 April, 1993.

73RD AMENDMENT ACT OF 1992:
Significance of the 73rd Amendment Act of 1992:
This act has added a new Part-IX to the Constitution of India. This part is entitled as ‘The Panchayats’ and consists of provisions from Articles 243 to 243 O. In addition, the act has also added a new Eleventh Schedule to the Constitution. This schedule contains 29 functional items of the panchayats. It deals with Article 243-G.
The act has given a practical shape to Article 40 of the Constitution which says that, “The State shall take steps to organise village panchayats and endow them with such powers and authority as may be necessary to enable them to function as units of self-government.” This article forms a part of the Directive Principles of State Policy. The act gives a constitutional status to the panchayati raj institutions. It has brought them under the purview of the justiciable part of the Constitution. In other words, the state governments are under constitutional obligation to adopt the new panchayati raj system in accordance with the provisions of the act. Consequently, neither the formation of panchayats nor the holding of elections at regular intervals depend on the will of the state government any more. The provisions of the act can be grouped into two categories– compulsory and voluntary. The compulsory (mandatory or obligatory) provisions of the act have to be included in the state laws creating the new panchayati raj system. The voluntary provisions, on the other hand, may be included at the discretion of the states. Thus the voluntary provisions of the act ensures the right of the states to take local factors like geographical, politico-administrative and others, into consideration while adopting the new panchayati raj system. The act is a significant landmark in the evolution of grassroot democratic institutions in the country. It transfers the representative democracy into participatory democracy. It is a revolutionary concept to build democracy at the grassroot level in the country.

The salient features of 73rd Amendment Act of 1992 are:
1. Gram Sabha:
The act provides for a Gram Sabha as the foundation of the panchayati raj system. It is a body consisting of persons registered in the electoral rolls of a village comprised within the area of Panchayat at the village level. Thus, it is a village assembly consisting of all the registered voters in the area of a panchayat. It may exercise such powers and perform such functions at the village level as the legislature of a state determines.

2. Three-Tier System:
The act provides for a three-tier system of panchayati raj in every state, that is, panchayats at the village, intermediate, and district levels. Thus, the act brings about uniformity in the structure of panchayati raj throughout the country. However, a state having a population not exceeding 20 lakh may not constitute panchayats at the intermediate level.

3. Election of Members and Chairpersons
All the members of panchayats at the village, intermediate and district levels shall be elected directly by the people. Further, the chairperson of panchayats at the intermediate and district levels shall be elected indi-rectly–by and from amongst the elected members thereof. However, the chairperson of a panchayat at the village level shall be elected in such manner as the state legislature determines. The chairperson of a panchayat and other members of a panchayat elected directly or indirectly shall have the right to vote in the meetings of the panchayats.

4. Reservation of Seats:
The act provides for the reservation of seats for scheduled castes and scheduled tribes in every panchayat (i.e., at all the three levels) in proportion of their population to the total population in the panchayat area. Further, the state legislature shall provide for the reservation of offices of chairperson in the panchayat at the village or any other level for the SCs and STs.

The act provides for the reservation of not less than one-third of the total number of seats for women (including the number of seats reserved for women belonging the SCs and STs). Further, not less than one-third of the total number of offices of chairpersons in the panchayats at each level shall be reserved for women. The act also authorises the legislature of a state to make any provision for reservation of seats in any panchayat or offices of chairperson in the panchayat at any level in favour of backward classes.
The reservation of seats as well as the reservation of offices of chairpersons in the panchayats for the scheduled castes and scheduled tribes shall cease to have effect after the expiration of the period specified in Article 334 (which is presently seventy years, that is, till 2020).

It must be noted here that the above provision relating to the reservation of seats in panchayats (both members and chairpersons) for the scheduled castes is not applicable to the state of Arunachal Pradesh. This is because the state is inhabited fully by indigenous tribal people and there are no scheduled castes. This provision was added later by the 83rd Constitutional Amendment Act of 2000. Duration of Panchayats The act provides for a five-year term of office to the panchayat at every level. However, it can be dissolved before the completion of its term. Further, fresh elections to constitute a panchayat shall be completed:
(a) before the expiry of its duration of five years; or 
(b) in case of dissolution, before the expiry of a period of six months from the date of its dissolution.

But, where the remainder of the period (for which the dissolved panchayat would have continued) is less than six months, it shall not be necessary to hold any election for constituting the new panchayat for such period.
Moreover, a panchayat constituted upon the dissolution of a panchayat before the expiration of its duration shall continue only for the remainder of the period for which the dissolved panchayat would have continued had it not been so dissolved. In other words, a panchayat reconstituted after premature dissolution does not enjoy the full period of five years but remains in office only for the remainder of the period.

5. Disqualifications:
A person shall be disqualified for being chosen as or for being a member of panchayat if he is so disqualified, 
(a) under any law for the time being in force for the purpose of elections to the legislature of the state concerned, or 
(b) under any law made by the state legislature. However, no person shall be disqualified on the ground that he is less than 25 years of age if he has attained the age of 21 years. 
Further, all questions of disqualifications shall be referred to such authority as the state legislature determines.

6. State Election Commission:
The superintendence, direction and control of the preparation of electoral rolls and the conduct of all elections to the panchayats shall be vested in the state election commission. It consists of a state election commissioner to be appointed by the governor. His conditions of service and tenure of office shall also be determined by the governor. He shall not be removed from the office except in the manner and on the grounds prescribed for the removal of a judge of the state high court4. His conditions of service shall not be varied to his disadvantage after his appointment. The state legislature may make provision with respect to all matters relating to elections to the panchayats.

7. Powers and Functions:
The state legislature may endow the Panchayats with such powers and authority as may be necessary to enable them to function as institutions of self-government. Such a scheme may contain provisions for the devolution of powers and responsibilities upon Panchayats at the appropriate level with respect to 
(a) the preparation of plans for economic development and social justice; 
(b) the implementation of schemes for economic development and social justice as may be entrusted to them, including those in relation to the 29 matters listed in the Eleventh Schedule.

8. Finances:
The state legislature may (a) authorise a panchayat to levy, collect and appropriate taxes, duties, tolls and fees; (b) assign to a panchayat taxes, duties, tolls and fees levied and collected by the state government; (c) provide for making grants-in-aid to the panchayats from the consolidated fund of the state; and (d) provide for constitution of funds for crediting all moneys of the panchayats.

9. Finance Commission:
The governor of a state shall, after every five years, constitute a finance commission to review the financial position of the panchayats. It shall make the following recommendations to the Governor:
1. The principles that should govern:
(a) The distribution between the state and the panchayats of the net proceeds of the taxes, duties, tolls and fees levied by the state and allocation of shares amongst the panchay-ats at all levels.
(b) The determination of taxes, duties, tolls and fees that may be assigned to the panchayats.
(c) The grants-in-aid to the panchayats from the consolidated fund of the state.
2. The measures needed to improve the financial position of the panchayats.
3. Any other matter referred to it by the governor in the interests of sound finance of the panchayats.

The state legislature may provide for the composition of the commission, the required qualifications of its members and the manner of their selection.
The governor shall place the recommendations of the commission along with the action taken report before the state legislature. The Central Finance Commission shall also suggest the measures needed to augment the consolidated fund of a state to supplement the resources of the panchayats in the states (on the basis of the recommendations made by the finance commission of the state).

10. Audit of Accounts:
The state legislature may make provisions with respect to the maintenance of accounts by the panchayats and the auditing of such accounts.

11. Application to Union Territories:
The provisions of this Part are applicable to the Union territories. But, the President may direct that they would apply to a Union territory subject to such exceptions and modifications as he may specify. Exempted States and Areas
The act does not apply to the states of Nagaland, Meghalaya and Mizoram and certain other areas. These areas include, 
(a) the scheduled areas and the tribal areas in the states5 ; 
(b) the hill areas of Manipur for which district councils exist; and 
(c) Darjeeling district of West Bengal for which Darjeeling Gorkha Hill Council exists. 
However, the Parliament may extend the provisions of this Part to the scheduled areas and tribal areas subject to such exceptions and modifications as it may specify. Under this provision, the Parliament has enacted the “Provisions of the Panchayats (Extension to the Scheduled Areas Act”, 1996, popularly known as the PESA Act or the Extension Act.

12. Continuance of Existing Laws and Panchayats:
All the state laws relating to panchayats shall continue to be in force until the expiry of one year from the commencement of this act. In other words, the states have to adopt the new panchayati raj system based on this act within the maximum period of one year from 24 April, 1993, which was the date of the commencement of this act. However, all the panchayats existing immediately before the commencement of act shall continue till the expiry of their term, unless dissolved by the state legislature sooner. Consequently, majority of states passed the panchayati raj acts in 1993 and 1994 to adopt the new system in accordance with the 73rd Constitutional Amendment Act of 1992.

13. Bar to Interference by Courts in Electoral Matters:
The act bars the interference by courts in the electoral matters of panchayats. It declares that the validity of any law relating to the delimitation of constituencies or the allotment of seats to such constituencies cannot be questioned in any court. It further lays down that no election to any panchayat is to be questioned except by an election petition presented to such authority and in such manner as provided by the state legislature.

14. Eleventh Schedule:
It contains the following 29 functional items placed within the purview of panchayats:
1. Agriculture, including agricultural extension
2. Land improvement, implementation of land reforms, land consolidation and soil conservation
3. Minor irrigation, water management and watershed development
4. Animal husbandry, dairying and poultry
5. Fisheries
6. Social forestry and farm forestry
7. Minor forest produce
8. Small-scale industries, including food processing industries
9. Khadi, village and cottage industries
10. Rural housing
11. Drinking water
12. Fuel and fodder
13. Roads, culverts, bridges, ferries, waterways and other means of communication
14. Rural electrification, including distribution of electricity
15. Non-conventional energy sources
16. Poverty alleviation programme
17. Education, including primary and secondary schools
18. Technical training and vocational education
19. Adult and non-formal education
20. Libraries
21. Cultural activities
22. Markets and fairs
23. Health and sanitation including hospitals, primary health centres and dispensaries
24. Family welfare
25. Women and child development
26. Social welfare, including welfare of the handicapped and mentally retarded
27. Welfare of the weaker sections, and in particular, of the scheduled castes and the scheduled tribes
28. Public distribution system
29. Maintenance of community assets.

COMPULSORY AND VOLUNTARY PROVISIONS OF THE 73RD CONSTITUTIONAL AMENDMENT ACT (1992):
A. Compulsory Provisions:
1. Organisation of Gram Sabha in a village or group of villages.
2. Establishment of panchayats at the village, intermediate and district levels.
3. Direct elections to all seats in panchay-ats at the village, intermediate and district levels.
4. Indirect elections to the post of chairperson of panchayats at the intermediate and district levels.
5. Voting rights of the chairperson and other members of a panchayat elected directly or indirectly.
6. 21 years to be the minimum age for contesting elections to panchayats.
7. Reservation of seats (both members and chairpersons) for SCs and STs in panchayats at all the three levels.
8. Reservation of one-third seats (both members and chairpersons) for women in panchayats at all the three levels.
9. Fixing tenure of five years for panchay-ats at all levels and holding fresh elections within six months in the event of supersession of any panchayat.
10. Establishment of a State Election Commission for conducting elections to the panchayats.
11. Constitution of a State Finance Commission after every five years to review the financial position of the panchayats.

B. Voluntary Provisions:
1. Endowing the Gram Sabha with powers and functions at the village level.
2. Determining the manner of election of the chairperson of the village panchayat.
3. Giving representation to the chairpersons of the village panchayats in the intermediate panchayats or in the case of a state not having intermediate panchayats, in the district panchayats.
4. Giving representation to the chairpersons of the intermediate panchayats in the district panchayats.
5. Giving representation to members of the Parliament (both the Houses) and the state legislature (both the Houses) in the panchayats at different levels falling within their constituencies.
6. Providing reservation of seats (both members and chairpersons) for backward classes in panchayats at any level.
7. Granting powers and authority to the panchayats to enable them to function as institutions of self-government (in brief, making them autonomous bodies).
8. Devolution of powers and responsibilities upon panchayats to prepare plans for economic development and social justice; and to perform some or all of the 29 functions listed in the Eleventh Schedule of the Constitution.
9. Granting financial powers to the panchayats, that is, authorizing them to levy, collect and appropriate taxes, duties, tolls and fees.
10. Assigning to a panchayat the taxes, duties, tolls and fees levied and collected by the state government.
11. Making the grants-in-aid to the panchay-ats from the consolidated fund of the state.
12. Providing for constitution of funds for crediting all moneys of the panchayats.

PESA ACT OF 1996 (EXTENSION ACT):
The provisions of Part IX of the constitution relating to the Panchayats are not applicable to the Fifth Schedule areas. However, the Parliament may extend these provisions to such areas, subject to such exceptions and modifications as it may specify. Under this provision, the Parliament has enacted the “Provisions of the Panchayats (Extension to the Scheduled Areas) Act”, 1996, popularly known as the PESA Act or the Extension Act. At present (2019), ten states have Fifth Schedule Areas. These are: Andhra Pradesh, Telangana, Chhatisgarh, Gujarat, Himachal Pradesh, Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Odisha and Rajasthan. All the ten states have enacted requisite compliance legislations by amending the respective Panchayati Raj Acts.

The objectives of the PESA Act are as follows:
1. To extend the provisions of Part IX of the Constitution relating to the panchayats to the scheduled areas with certain modifications
2. To provide self-rule for the bulk of the tribal population
3. To have village governance with participatory democracy and to make the gram sabha a nucleus of all activities
4. To evolve a suitable administrative framework consistent with traditional practices
5. To safeguard and to preserve the traditions and customs of tribal communities
6. To empower panchayats at the appropriate levels with specific powers conducive to tribal requirements
7. To prevent panchayats at the higher level from assuming the powers and authority of panchayats at the lower level of the gram sabha

The features (or the provisions) of the PESA Act are as follows:
1. A state legislation on the Panchayats in the Scheduled Areas shall be in consonance with the customary law, social and religious practices and traditional management practices of community resources.
2. A village shall ordinarily consist of a habitation or a group of habitations or a hamlet or a group of hamlets comprising a community and managing its affairs in accordance with traditions and customs.
3. Every village shall have a Gram Sabha consisting of persons whose names are included in the electoral rolls for the Panchayat at the village level.
4. Every Gram Sabha shall be competent to safeguard and preserve the traditions and customs of the people, their cultural identity, community resources and the customary mode of dispute resolution.
5. Every Gram Sabha shall–
(i) approve of the plans, programmes and projects for social economic development before they are taken up implementation by the Panchayat at the village level; and
(ii) be responsible for the identification of beneficiaries under poverty alleviation and other programmes.
6. Every Panchayat at the village level shall be required to obtain from the Gram Sabha a certification of utilisation of funds for the above plans, programmes and projects.
7. The reservation of seats in the Scheduled Areas in every Panchayat shall be in proportion to the population of the communities for whom reservation is sought to be given under Part IX of the Constitution. However, the reservation for the Scheduled Tribes shall not be less than one-half of the total number of seats. Further, all seats of Chairpersons of Panchayats at all levels shall be reserved for the Scheduled Tribes.
8. The state government may nominate such Scheduled Tribes which have no representation in the Panchayat at the intermediate level or the Panchayat at the district level. But such nomination shall not exceed one-tenth of the total members to be elected in that Panchayat.
9. The Gram Sabha or the Panchayats at the appropriate level shall be consulted before making the acquisition of land in the Scheduled Areas for development projects and before resettling or rehabilitating persons affected by such projects in the Scheduled Areas. However, the actual planning and implementation of the projects in the Scheduled Areas shall be coordinated at the state level.
10. Planning and management of minor water bodies in the Scheduled Areas shall be entrusted to Panchayats at the appropriate level.
11. The recommendations of the Gram Sabha or the Panchayats at the appropriate level shall be mandatory for grant of prospecting licence or mining lease for minor minerals in the Scheduled Areas.
12. The prior recommendation of the Gram Sabha or the Panchayats at the appropriate level shall be mandatory for grant of concession for the exploitation of minor minerals by auction.
13. While endowing Panchayats in the Scheduled Areas with such powers and authority as may be necessary to enable them to function as institutions of self-government, a State Legislature shall ensure that the Panchayats at the appropriate level and the Gram Sabha are endowed specifically with–
(i) the power to enforce prohibition or to regulate or restrict the consumption of any intoxicant
(ii) the ownership of minor forest produce
(iii) the power to prevent alienation of land in the Scheduled Article and to take appropriate action to restore any unlawfully alienation land of a Scheduled Tribe
(iv) the power to manage village markets
(v) the power to exercise control over money lending to Scheduled Tribes
(vi) the power to exercise control over institutions and functionaries of all social sectors
(vii) the power to control local plans and resources for such places including tribal sub-plans
14. The State Legislations shall contain safeguards to ensure that Panchayats at the higher level do not assume the powers and authority of any Panchayat at the lower level or of the Gram Sabha.
15. The State Legislature shall endeavour to follow the pattern of the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution while designing the administrative arrangements in the Panchayats at district levels in the Scheduled Areas.
16. Any provision of any law (relating to Panchayats in the Scheduled Areas) which is inconsistent with the provisions of this Act shall cease to be in force at the expiry of one year from the date on which this Act receives the assent of the President.
However, all the Panchayats existing immediately before such date shall continue till the expiry of their term, unless dissolved by the State Legislature sooner.

FINANCES OF PANCHAYATI RAJ:
The Second Administrative Reforms Commission of India (2005– 2009) has summarized the sources of revenue of the Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs) and their financial problems in the following way:
1. A major portion of Part IX of the Constitution deals with structural empowerment of the PRIs but the real strength in terms of both autonomy and efficiency of these institutions is dependent on their financial position (including their capacity to generate own resources). In general, Panchayats in our country receive funds in the following ways:
(i) Grants from the Union Government based on recommendations of the Central Finance Commission as Article 280 of the Constitution.
(ii) Devolution from the State Government based on recommendations of the State Finance Commission as per Art 243-I.
(iii) Loans / grants from the State Government.
(iv) Programme-specific allocation under Centrally Sponsored Schemes and Additional Central Assistance.
(v) Internal Resource Generation (tax and non-tax).
2. Across the country, States have not given adequate attention to fiscal empowerment of the Panchayats. The Panchayats own resources are meager. Kerala, Karnataka and Tamil Nadu are the states which are considered to be progressive in PRIs empowerment but even there, the Panchayats are heavily dependent on government grants. One can draw the following broad conclusions:
(i) Internal resource generation at the Panchayat level is weak. This is partly due to a thin tax domain and partly due to Panchayats own reluctance in collecting revenue.
(ii) Panchayats are heavily dependent on grants from Union and State Governments.
(iii) A major portion of the grants both from Union as well as the State Governments is scheme specific. Panchayats have limited discretion and flexibility in incurring expenditure.
(iv) In view of their own tight fiscal position, State Governments are not keen to devolve funds to Panchayats.
(v) In most of the critical Eleventh Schedule matters like primary education, healthcare, water supply, sanitation and irrigation even now, it is the State Government which is directly responsible for implementation of these programmes.
(vi) Overall, a situation has been created where Panchayats has responsibility but grossly inadequate resources.
3. Though, in absolute terms, the quantum of funds the Union/State Government transfers to a Panchayat forms the major component of its receipt, the PRI’s own resource generation is the soul behind its financial standing. It is not only a question of resources; it is the existence of a local taxation system which ensures people’s involvement in the affairs of an elected body. It also makes the institution accountable to its citizens.
4. In terms of own resource collection, the Gram Panchayats are comparatively in a better position because they have a tax domain of their own, while the other two tiers are dependent only on tolls, fees and non-tax revenue for generating internal resources.
5. State Panchayati Raj Acts have given most of the taxation powers to Village Panchayats. The revenue domain of the intermediate and District Panchayats (both tax as well as nontax) has been kept much smaller and remains confined to secondary areas like ferry services, markets, water and conservancy services, registration of vehicles, cess on stamp duty and a few others.
6. A study of various State Legislations indicates that a number of taxes, duties, tolls and fees come under the jurisdiction of the Village Panchayats. These interalia include octroi, property/house tax, profession tax, land tax/cess, taxes/tolls on vehicles, entertainment tax/fees, license fees, tax on nonagriculture land, fee on registration of cattle, sanitation/drainage/ conservancy tax, water rate/ tax, lighting rate/tax, education cess and tax on fairs and festivals.

REASONS FOR INEFFECTIVE PERFORMANCE PANCHAYATI RAJ INSTITUTIONS (PRIS):
Even after conferring the constitutional status and protection through the 73rd Amendment Act (1992), the performance of the Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs) has not been satisfactory and not upto the expected level. The various reasons for this sub-optimal performance are as follows:
1. Lack of adequate devolution: Many States have not taken adequate steps to devolve 3Fs (i.e., functions, funds and functionaries) to the PRIs to enable them to discharge their constitutionally stipulated function. Further, it is imperative that the PRIs have resources to match the responsibilities entrusted to them. While SFCs (state finance commissions) have submitted their recommendations, not many few States have implemented these or taken steps to ensure the fiscal viability of the PRIs.
2. Excessive control by bureaucracy: In some States, the Gram Panchayats have been placed in a position of subordination. Hence, the Gram Panchayat Sarpanches have to spend extraordinary amount of time visiting Block Offices for funds and/or technical approval. These interactions with the Block staff office distort the role of Sarpanches as elected representatives.
3. Tied nature of funds: This has two implications. The activities stated under a certain scheme are not always appropriate for all parts of the district. This results in unsuitable activities being promoted or an under-spend of the funds.
4. Overwhelming dependency on government funding: A review of money received and own source funds shows the overwhelming dependence of Panchayats on government funding. When Panchayats do not raise resources and instead receive funds from outside, people are less likely to request a social audit.
5. Reluctance to use fiscal powers: An important power devolved to GP (Gram Panchayat) is the right to levy tax on property, business, markets, fairs and also for services provided, like street lighting or public toilets, etc. Very few Panchayats use their fiscal power to levy and collect taxes. The argument pushed by Panchayat heads is that it is difficult to levy tax on your own constituency, especially when you live in the community.
6. Status of the Gram Sabha: Empowering the Gram Sabhas could have been a powerful weapon for transparency, accountability and for involvement of the marginalized sections. However, a number of the State Acts have not spelt the powers of Gram Sabhas nor have any procedures been laid down for the functioning of these bodies or penalties for the officials.
7. Creation of Parallel Bodies: Often, Parallel Bodies (PBs) are created for supposedly speedy implementation and greater accountability. However, there is little evidence to show that such PBs have avoided the evils including that of partisan politics, sharing of spoils, corruption and elite capture. Missions (in particular) often bypassing mainstream programmes, create disconnect, duality, and alienation between the existing and the new structures and functions. PBs usurp the legitimate space of PRIs and demoralize the PRIs by virtue of their superior resource endowments.
8. Poor Infrastructure: A large number of Gram Panchayats in the country do not have even full time Secretary. Around 25 percent of the Gram Panchayats do not have basic office buildings. The database for planning, monitoring etc., are lacking in most of the cases.
A large number of elected representatives of PRIs are semiliterate or literate and know little about their roles & responsibilities, programmes, procedures, systems. Often for want of good, relevant and periodic training, they are not able to perform their functions properly.
Although all the District and Intermediate Panchayats are connected with computers, only around 20% Gram Panchayats reported to be having computing facility. In some States, Village Panchayats do not have any computing facility.

Municipalities:
The term ‘Urban Local Government’ in India signifies the governance of an urban area by the people through their elected representatives. The jurisdiction of an urban local government is limited to a specific urban area which is demarcated for this purpose by the state government1 . There are eight types of urban local governments in India– municipal corporation, municipality, notified area committee, town area committee, cantonment board, township, port trust and special purpose agency.
The system of urban government was constitutionalised through the 74th Constitutional Amendment Act of 1992. At the Central level, the subject of ‘urban local government’ is dealt with by the following three ministries:
(i) Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs.
(ii) Ministry of Defence in the case of cantonment boards
(iii) Ministry of Home Affairs in the case of Union Territories

EVOLUTION OF URBAN BODIES:
Historical Perspective:
The institutions of urban local government originated and developed in modern India during the period of British rule. The major events in this context are as follows:
(i) In 1688, the first municipal corporation in India was set up at Madras.
(ii) In 1726, the municipal corporations were set up in Bombay and Calcutta.
(iii) Lord Mayo’s Resolution of 1870 on financial decentralisation visualised the development of local self-government institutions.
(iv) Lord Ripon’s Resolution of 1882 has been hailed as the ‘Magna Carta’ of local self-government. He is called as the father of local-self government in India.
(v) The Royal Commission on decentralisation was appointed in 1907 and it submitted its report in 1909. Its chairman was Hobhouse.
(vi) Under the dyarchical scheme introduced in Provinces by the Government of India Act of 1919, local self-government became a transferred subject under the charge of a responsible Indian minister.
(vii) In 1924, the Cantonments Act was passed by the Central legislature.
(viii) Under the provincial autonomy scheme introduced by the Government of India Act of 1935, local self-government was declared a provincial subject.

The committees and commissions appointed by the Central Government to improve the functioning of urban local governments are:
In August 1989, the Rajiv Gandhi government introduced the 65th Constitutional Amendment Bill (i.e., Nagarpalika Bill) in the Lok Sabha. The bill aimed at strengthening and revamping the municipal bodies by conferring a constitutional status on them. Although the bill was passed in the Lok Sabha, it was defeated in the Rajya Sabha in October 1989 and hence, lapsed.

The National Front Government under V P Singh introduced the revised Nagarpalika Bill in the Lok Sabha again in September 1990. However, the bill was not passed and finally lapsed due to the
dissolution of the Lok Sabha.

P V Narasimha Rao’s Government also introduced the modified Municipalities Bill inthe Lok Sabha in September 1991. It finally emerged as the 74th Constitutional Amendment Act of 1992 and came into force on 1 June 19932 .

74TH AMENDMENT ACT OF 1992:
This Act has added a new Part IX-A to the Constitution of India. This part is entitled as ‘The Municipalities’ and consists of provisions from Articles 243-P to 243-ZG. In addition, the act has also added a new Twelfth Schedule to the Constitution. This schedule contains eighteen functional items of municipalities. It deals with Article 243-W. The act gave constitutional status to the municipalities. It has brought them under the purview of justiciable part of the Constitution. In other words, state governments are under constitutional obligation to adopt the new system of municipalities in accordance with the provisions of the act.
The act aims at revitalising and strengthening the urban governments so that they function effectively as units of local government.


The salient features of the 74th Amendment Act of 1992 are:
1. Three Types of Municipalities:
The act provides for the constitution of the following three types of municipalities in every state.
(i). A nagar panchayat (by whatever name called) for a transitional area.
(ii). A municipal council for a smaller urban area.
(iii). A municipal corporation for a larger urban area.
But, there is one exception. If there is an urban area where municipal services are being provided by an industrial establishment, then the governor may specify that area to be an industrial township. In such a case, a municipality may not be constituted.
The governor has to specify a transitional area, a smaller urban area or a larger urban area, keeping in view the following factors:
(a) Population of the area.
(b) Density of the population therein.
(c) Revenue generated for local administration.
(d) Percentage of employment in non-agricultural activities.
(e) Economic importance.
(f) Such other factors as he may deem fit.

2. Composition of municipality:
All the members of a municipality shall be elected directly by the people of the municipal area. For this purpose, each municipal area shall be divided into territorial constituencies to be known as wards. The state legislature may provide the manner of election of the chairperson of a municipality. It may also provide for the representation of the following persons in a municipality.
1. Persons having special knowledge or experience in municipal administration without the right to vote in the meetings of municipality. 
2. The members of the Lok Sabha and the state legislative assembly representing constituencies that comprise wholly or partly the municipal area. 
3. The members of the Rajya Sabha and the state legislative council registered as electors within the municipal area. 
4. The chairpersons of committees (other than wards committees). Wards Committees There shall be constituted a wards committee, consisting of one or more wards, within the territorial area of a municipality having population of three lakh or more. The state legislature may make provision with respect to the composition and the territorial area of a wards committee and the manner in which the seats in a wards committee shall be filled.
Other Committees:
In addition to the wards committees, the state legislature is also allowed to make any provision for the constitution of other committees. The chairpersons of such committees may be made members of the municipality.

3. Reservation of Seats:
The act provides for the reservation of seats for the scheduled castes and the scheduled tribes in every municipality in proportion of their population to the total population in the municipal area. Further, it provides for the reservation of not less than one-third of the total number of seats for women (including the number of seats reserved for woman belonging to the SCs and the STs). The state legislature may provide for the manner of reservation of offices of chairpersons in the municipalities for SCs, STs and women. It may also make any provision for the reservation of seats in any municipality or offices of chairpersons in municipalities in favour of backward classes.
The reservation of seats as well as the reservation of offices of chairpersons in the municipalities for the scheduled castes and scheduled tribes shall cease to have effect after the expiration of the period specified in Article 334 (which is presently seventy years, that is, till 2020).

4. Duration of Municipalities:
The act provides for a five-year term of office for every municipality. However, it can be dissolved before the completion of its term. Further, the fresh elections to constitute a municipality shall be completed (a) before the expiry of its duration of five years; or 
(b) in case of dissolution, before the expiry of a period of six months from the date of its dissolution.
But, where the remainder of the period (for which the dissolved municipality would have continued) is less than six months, it shall not be necessary to hold any election for constituting the new municipality for such period.
Moreover, a municipality constituted upon the dissolution of a municipality before the expiration of its duration shall continue only for the remainder of the period for which the dissolved municipality would have continued had it not been so dissolved. In other words, a municipality reconstituted after premature dissolution does not enjoy the full period of five years but remains in office only for the remainder of the period.
The act also makes two more provisions with respect to dissolution: 
(a) a municipality must be given a reasonable opportunity of being heard before its dissolution; and 
(b) no amendment of any law for the time being in force shall cause dissolution of a municipality before the expiry of the five years term.

5. Disqualifications:
A person shall be disqualified for being chosen as or for being a member of a municipality if he is so disqualified (a) under any law for the time being in force for the purposes of elections to the legislature of the state concerned; or
 (b) under any law made by the state legislature. However, no person shall be disqualified on the ground that he is less than 25 years of age if he has attained the age of 21 years. 
 Further, all questions of disqualifications shall be referred to such authority as the state legislature determines.

6. State Election Commission:
The superintendence, direction and control of the preparation of electoral rolls and the conduct of all elections to the municipalities shall be vested in the state election commission. The state legislature may make provision with respect to all matters relating to elections to the municipalities.

Powers and Functions of Municipalities:
The state legislature may endow the municipalities with such powers and authority as may be necessary to enable them to function as institutions of self-government. Such a scheme may contain provisions for the devolution of powers and responsibilities upon municipalities at the appropriate level with respect to (a) the preparation of plans for economic development and social justice; (b) the implementation of schemes for economic development and social justice as may be entrusted to them, including those in relation to the eighteen matters listed in the Twelfth Schedule.

Finances of Municipalities:
The state legislature may 
(a) authorise a municipality to levy, collect and appropriate taxes, duties, tolls and fees; 
(b) assign to a municipality taxes, duties, tolls and fees levied and collected by state government; 
(c) provide for making grants-in-aid to the municipalities from the consolidated fund of the state; and 
(d) provide for constitution of funds for crediting all moneys of the municipalities.

Finance Commission:
The finance commission (which is constituted for the panchayats) shall also, for every five years, review the financial position of municipalities and make recommendation to the governor as to:
1. The principles that should govern:
(a) The distribution between the state and the municipalities of the net proceeds of the taxes, duties, tolls and fees levied by the state and allocation of shares amongst the municipalities at all levels.
(b) The determination of the taxes, duties, tolls and fees that may be assigned to the municipalities.
(c) The grants-in-aid to the municipalities from the consolidated fund of the state.
2. The measures needed to improve the financial position of the municipalities.
3. Any other matter referred to it by the governor in the interests of sound finance of municipalities.
The governor shall place the recommendations of the commission along with the action taken report before the state legislature. The central finance commission shall also suggest the measures needed to augment the consolidated fund of a state to supplement the resources of the municipalities in the state (on the basis of the recommendations made by the finance commission of the state).

Audit of Accounts:
The state legislature may make provisions with respect to the maintenance of accounts by municipalities and the auditing of such accounts.

Application to Union Territories:
The provisions of this part are applicable to the Union territories. But, the President may direct that they would apply to a Union territory subject to such exceptions and modifications as he may specify.

Exempted Areas:
The act does not apply to the scheduled areas and tribal areas in the states. It shall also not affect the functions and powers of the Darjeeling Gorkha Hill Council of the West Bengal.
However, the Parliament may extend the provisions of this part to the scheduled areas and tribal areas subject to such exceptions and modifications as it may specify.

District Planning Committee:
Every state shall constitute at the district level, a district planning committee to consolidate the plans prepared by panchayats and municipalities in the district, and to prepare a draft development plan for the district as a whole. The state legislature may make provisions with respect to the following:
1. The composition of such committees;
2. The manner of election of members of such committees;
3. The functions of such committees in relation to district planning; and
4. The manner of the election of the chairpersons of such committees.
The act lays down that four-fifths of the members of a district planning committee should be elected by the elected members of the district panchayat and municipalities in the district from amongst themselves. The representation of these members in the committee should be in proportion to the ratio between the rural and urban populations in the district.
The chairperson of such committee shall forward the development plan to the state government. In preparing the draft development plan, a district planning committee shall (a) Have regard to–
(i) matters of common interest between the Panchayats and Municipalities including spatial planning, sharing of water other physical and natural resources, the integrated development of infrastructure and environmental conservation;
(ii) the extent and type of available resources whether financially otherwise; and
(b) Consult such institutions and organisations as the Governor may specify.

Metropolitan Planning Committee:
Every metropolitan area shall have a metropolitan planning committee to prepare a draft development plan. The state legislature may make provisions with respect to the following:
1. The composition of such committees;
2. The manner of election of members of such committees;
3. The representation in such committes of the Central government, state government and other organisations;
4. The functions of such committees in relation to planning and coordination for the metropolitan area; and
5. The manner of election of chairpersons of such committees.
The act lays down that two-thirds of the members of a metropolitan planning committee should be elected by the elected members of the municipalities and chairpersons of the panchayats in the metropolitan area from amongst themselves. The representation of these members in the committee should be in proportion to the ratio between the population of the municipalities and the panchayats in that metropolitan area.
The chairpersons of such committees shall forward the development plan to the state government. In preparing the draft development plan, a metropolitan planning committee shall (a) Have regard to–
(i) the plans prepared by the Municipalities and the Panchayats the Metropolitan area;
(ii) matters of common interest between the Municipalities and t Pan-chayats, including co-ordinated spatial planning of the are sharing of water and other physical and natural resources, t integrated development of infrastructure and environmen conservation;
(iii) the overall objectives and priorities set by the Government India and the government of the state;
(iv) the extent and nature of investments likely to be made in the Metropolitan area by agencies of the Government of India and
the Government of the State and other available resources whether financial or otherwise; and
(b) consult such institutions and organisations as the Governor may specify.

Continuance of Existing Laws and Municipalities:
All the state laws relating to municipalities shall continue to be in force until the expiry of one year from the commencement of this act. In other words, the states have to adopt the new system of municipalities based on this act within the maximum period of one year from 1 June, 1993, which is the date of commencement of this act. However, all municipalities existing immediately before the commencement of this act shall continue till the expiry of their term, unless dissolved by the state legislature sooner.

Bar to Interference by Courts in Electoral Matters:
The act bars the interference by courts in the electoral matters of municipalities. It declares that the validity of any law relating to the delimitation of constituencies or the allotment of seats to such constituencies cannot be questioned in any court. It further lays down that no election to any municipality is to be questioned except by an election petition presented to such authority and in such manner as provided by the state legislature.

Twelfth Schedule: It contains the following 18 functional items placed within the purview of municipalities:
1. Urban planning including town planning;
2. Regulation of land use and construction of buildings;
3. Planning for economic and social development;
4. Roads and bridges;
5. Water supply for domestic, industrial and commercial purposes;
6. Public health, sanitation, conservancy and solid waste management;
7. Fire services;
8. Urban forestry, protection of the environment and promotion of ecological aspects;
9. Safeguarding the interests of weaker sections of society, including the handicapped and mentally retarded;
10. Slum improvement and upgradation;
11. Urban poverty alleviation;
12. Provision of urban amenities and facilities such as parks, gardens, playgrounds;
13. Promotion of cultural, educational and aesthetic aspects;
14. Burials and burial grounds, cremations and cremation grounds and electric crematoriums;
15. Cattle ponds, prevention of cruelty to animals;
16. Vital statistics including registration of births and deaths;
17. Public amenities including street lighting, parking lots, bus stops and public conveniences; and
18. Regulation of slaughter houses and tanneries.

TYPES OF URBAN GOVERNMENTS:
The following eight types of urban local bodies are created in India for the administration of urban areas:
• Municipal Corporation
• Municipality
• Notified Area Committee
• Town Area Committee
• Cantonment Board
• Township
• Port Trust
• Special Purpose Agency

1. Municipal Corporation:
Municipal corporations are created for the administration of big cities like Delhi, Mumbai, Kolkata, Hyderabad, Bangalore and others. They are established in the states by the acts of the concerned state legislatures, and in the union territories by the acts of the Parliament of India. There may be one common act for all the municipal corporations in a state or a separate act for each municipal corporation.
A municipal corporation has three authorities, namely, the council, the standing committees and the commissioner. The Council is the deliberative and legislative wing of the corporation. It consists of the Councillors directly elected by the people, as well as a few nominated persons having knowledge or experience of municipal administration. In brief, the composition of the Council including the reservation of seats for SCs, STs and women is governed by the 74th Constitutional Amendment Act. The Council is headed by a Mayor. He is assisted by a Deputy Mayor. He is elected in a majority of the states for a one-year renewable term. He is basically an ornamental figure and a formal head of the corporation. His main function is to preside over the meetings of the Council.
The standing committees are created to facilitate the working of the council, which is too large in size. They deal with public works, education, health, taxation, finance and so on. They take decisions in their fields.
The municipal commissioner is responsible for the implementation of the decisions taken by the council and its standing committees. Thus, he is the chief executive authority of the corporation. He is appointed by the state government and is generally a member of the IAS.

2. Municipality:
The municipalities are established for the administration of towns and smaller cities. Like the corporations, they are also set up in the states by the acts of the concerned state legislatures and in the union territory by the acts of the Parliament of India. They are also known by various other names like municipal council, municipal committee, municipal board, borough municipality, city municipality and others.
Like a municipal corporation, a municipality also has three authorities, namely, the council, the standing committees and the chief executive officer.
The council is the deliberative and legislative wing of the municipality. It consists of the councillors directly elected by the people.
The council is headed by a president/chair-man. He is assisted by a vice-president/vice-chairman. He presides over the meetings of the council. Unlike the Mayor of a municipal corporation, he plays a significant role and is the pivot of the municipal administration. Apart from presiding over the meetings of the Council, he enjoys executive powers.
The standing committees are created to facilitate the working of the council. They deal with public works, taxation, health, finance and so on.
The chief executive officer/chief municipal officer is responsible for day-to-day general administration of the municipality. He is appointed by the state government.

3. Notified Area Committee:
A notified area committee is created for the administration of two types of areas–a fast developing town due to industrialisation, and a town which does not yet fulfil all the conditions necessary for the constitution of a municipality, but which otherwise is considered important by the state government. Since it is established by a notification in the government gazette, it is called as notified area committee. Though it functions within the framework of the State Municipal Act, only those provisions of the act apply to it which are notified in the government gazette by which it is created. It may also be entrusted to exercise powers under any other act. Its powers are almost equivalent to those of a municipality. But unlike the municipality, it is an entirely nominated body, that is, all the members of a notified area committee including the chairman are nominated by the state government. Thus, it is neither an elected body nor a statutory body.

4. Town Area Committee:
A town area committee is set up for the administration of a small town. It is a semimunicipal authority and is entrusted with a limited number of civic functions like drainage, roads, street lighting, and conservancy. It is created by a separate act of a state legislature. Its composition, functions and other matters are governed by the act. It may be wholly elected or wholly nominated by the state government or partly elected and partly nominated.

5. Cantonment Board:
A cantonment board is established for municipal administration for civilian population in the cantonment area7. It is set up under the provisions of the Cantonments Act of 2006–a legislation enacted by the Central government. It works under the administrative control of the defence ministry of the Central government. Thus, unlike the above four types of urban local bodies, which are created and administered by the state government, a cantonment board is created as well as administered by the Central government. The Cantonments Act of 2006 was enacted to consolidate and amend the law relating to the administration of cantonments with a view to impart greater democratisation, improvement of their financial base to make provisions for developmental activities and for matters connected with them. This Act has repealed the Cantonments Act of 1924.
At present (2019), there are 62 cantonment boards in the country.

A cantonment board consists of partly elected and partly nominated members. The elected members hold office for a term of five years while the nominated members (i.e., ex-officio members) continue so long as they hold the office in that station. The military officer commanding the station is the ex-officio president of the board and presides over its meetings. The vice-president of the board is elected by the elected members from amongst themselves for a term of five years.
The Category I cantonment board consists of the following members:
(i) A military officer commanding the station
(ii) An executive engineer in the cantonment
(iii) A health officer in the cantonment
(iv) A first class magistrate nominated by the district magistrate
(v) Three military officers nominated by the officer commanding the station
(vi) Eight members elected by the people of the cantonment area
(vii) Chief Executive Officer of the cantonment board

The functions performed by a cantonment board are similar to those of a municipality. These are statutorily categorised into obligatory functions and discretionary functions. The sources of income includes both, tax revenue and non-tax revenue. The executive officer of the cantonment board is appointed by the president of India. He implements all the resolutions and decisions of the board and its committees. He belongs to the central cadre established for the purpose.

6. Township:
This type of urban government is established by the large public enterprises to provide civic amenities to its staff and workers who live in the housing colonies built near the plant. The enterprise appoints a town administrator to look after the administration of the township. He is assisted by some engineers and other technical and non-technical staff. Thus, the township form of urban government has no elected members. In fact, it is an extension of the bureaucratic structure of the enterprises. 

7. Port Trust:
The port trusts are established in the port areas like Mumbai, Kolkata, Chennai and so on for two purposes: 
(a) to manage and protect the ports; and 
(b) to provide civic amenities. 
Aport trust is created by an Act of Parliament. It consists of both elected and nominated members. Its chairman is an official. Its civic functions are more or less similar to those of a municipality.

8. Special Purpose Agency:
In addition to these seven area-based urban bodies (or multipurpose agencies), the states have set up certain agencies to undertake designated activities or specific functions that ‘legitimately’ belong to the domain of municipal corporations or municipalities or other local urban governments. In other words, these are function-based and not areabased. They are known as ‘single purpose’, ‘uni-purpose’ or ‘special purpose’ agencies or ‘functional local bodies’. Some such bodies are:
1. Town improvement trusts.
2. Urban development authorities.
3. Water supply and sewerage boards.
4. Housing boards.
5. Pollution control boards.
6. Electricity supply boards.
7. City transport boards.
These functional local bodies are established as statutory bodies by an act of state legislature or as departments by an executive resolution. They function as autonomous bodies and deal with the functions allotted to them independently of the local urban governments, that is, municipal corporations or municipalities and so forth. Thus, they are not subordinate agencies of the local municipal bodies.

MUNICIPAL PERSONNEL:
There are three types of municipal personnel systems in India. The personnel working in the urban governments may belong to any one or all the three types. These are
1. Separate Personnel System: Under this system, each local body appoints, administers, and controls its own personnel. They are not transferable to other local bodies. It is the most widely prevalent system. This system upholds the principle of local autonomy and promotes undivided loyalty.
2. Unified Personnel System: In this system, the state government appoints, administers, and controls the municipal personnel. In other words, state-wide services (cadres) are created for all the urban bodies in the state. They are transferable between the local bodies in the state. This system is prevalent in Andhra Pradesh, Tamil Nadu, Uttar Pradesh, Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh and so on.
3. Integrated Personnel System: Under this system, the personnel of the state government and those of the local bodies form part of the same service. In other words, the municipal personnel are the members of the state services. They are transferable not only between the local bodies in the state but also between local bodies and departments of state government. Thus, there is no distinction between local civil service and state civil service. This system is prevalent in Odisha, Bihar, Karnataka, Punjab, Haryana and others.

The various national level institutions providing training to the municipal personnel are
1. All-India Institute of Local SelfGovernment (Mumbai) constituted in 1927; it is a private registered society 
2. Centre for Urban and Environmental Studies (New Delhi) set up in 1967 on the recommendation of Nur-uddin Ahmed Committee on Training of Municipal Employees (1963–1965)
3. Regional Centres for Urban and Environmental Studies (Kolkata, Lucknow, Hyderabad and Mumbai) set up in 1968 on the recommendation of Nur-ud-din Ahmed Committee on Training of Municipal Employees (1963–1965)
4. National Institute of Urban Affairs, established in 1976
5. Human Settlement Management Institute, established in 1985

MUNICIPAL REVENUE:
There are five sources of income of the urban local bodies. These are as follows:
1. Tax Revenue: The revenue from the local taxes include property tax, entertainment tax, taxes on advertisements, professional tax, water tax, tax on animals, lighting tax, pilgrim tax, market tax, toll on new bridges, octroi and so on. In addition, the municipal bodies imposes various cesses like library cess, education cess, beggary cess and so on. Octroi (i.e., taxes on the entry of goods into a local area for consumption, use or sale therein) has been abolished in most of the states. Property tax is the most important tax revenue.
2. Non-Tax Revenue: This source include rent on municipal properties, fees and fines, royalty, profits and dividends, interest, user charges and miscellaneous receipts. The user charges (i.e., payment for public utilities) include water charges, sanitation charges, sewerage charges and so on.
3. Grants: These include the various grants given to municipal bodies by the Central and State Governments for several development programmes, infrastructure schemes, urban reform initiatives and so on.
4. Devolution: This consists of the transfer of funds to the urban local bodies from the state government. This devolution is made on the basis of the recommendations of the state finance commission.
5. Loans: The urban local bodies raise loans from the state government as well as financial institutions to meet their capital expenditure. They can borrow from the financial institutions or other bodies only with the approval of the state government.

CENTRAL COUNCIL OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT:
The Central Council of Local Government was set up in 1954. It was constituted under Article 263 of the Constitution of India by an order of the President of India. Originally, it was known as the Central Council of Local Self-Government. However, the term ‘selfgovernment’ was found to be superfluous and hence was replaced by the term ‘government’ in the 1980s. Till 1958, it dealt with both urban as well as rural local governments, but after 1958 it has been dealing with matters of urban local government only.
The Council is an advisory body. It consists of the Minister for Urban Development in the Government of India and the ministers for local self government in states. The Union minister acts as the Chairman of the Council.
The Council performs the following functions with regard to local government:
(i) Considering and recommending the policy matters
(ii) Making proposals for legislation
(iii) Examining the possibility of cooperation between the Centre and the states
(iv) Drawing up a common programme of action
(v) Recommending Central financial assistance
(vi) Reviewing the work done by the local bodies with the Central financial assistance

Union Territories:
Under Article 1 of the Constitution, the territory of India comprises three categories of territories: 
(a) territories of the states;
(b) union territories; and 
(c) territories that may be acquired by the Government of India at any time. At present, there are twenty-nine states, seven union territories and no acquired territories.
The states are the members of the federal system in India and share a distribution of power with the Centre. The union territories, on the other hand, are those areas which are under the direct control and administration of the Central government. Hence, they are also known as ‘centrally administered territories’. ‘In this way, existence of these territories constitutes a conspicuous departure from federalism in India; the Government of India is plainly unitary in so far as the relationship between New Delhi and these Central enclaves is concerned’.

CREATION OF UNION TERRITORIES:
During the British Rule, certain areas were constituted as ‘scheduled districts’ in 1874. Later, they came to be known as ‘chief commissioners provinces’. After independence, they were placed in the category of Part ‘C’ States and Part ‘D’ Territories.

In 1956, they were constituted as the ‘union territories’ by the 7th Constitutional Amendment Act (1956) and the States Reorganisation Act (1956). Gradually, some of these union territories have been elevated to statehood. Thus, Himachal Pradesh, Manipur, Tripura, Mizoram, Arunachal Pradesh and Goa, which are states today were formerly union territories. On the other hand, the territories that were acquired from the Portuguese (Goa, Daman and Diu, and Dadra and Nagar Haveli) and the French (Puducherry) were constituted as the union territories.

The union territories have been created for a variety of reasons. These are mentioned below:
1. Political and administrative consideration–Delhi and Chandigarh.
2. Cultural distinctiveness–Puducherry, Dadra and Nagar Haveli, and Daman and Diu.
3. Strategic importance–Andaman and Nicobar Islands and Lakshadweep.
4. Special treatment and care of the backward and tribal people–Mizoram, Manipur, Tripura and Arunachal Pradesh which later became states.
In 2019, the erstwhile state of Jammu and Kashmir was bifurcated into two separate union territories, namely, the Union territory of Jammu and Kashmir, and the Union territory of Ladakh.

While introducing the Jammu and Kashmir Reorganisation Bill, 2019, in the Parliament, the central government gave the following reasons for the creation of these two new union territories:
1. The Ladakh division of the state of Jammu and Kashmir has a large area but is sparsely populated with a very difficult terrain. There has been a long pending demand of people of Ladakh, to give it the status of a Union territory to enable them to realize their aspirations. The Union territory of Ladakh will be without a legislature.
2. Further, keeping in view the prevailing internal security situation, fuelled by cross border terrorism in the existing state of Jammu and Kashmir, a separate Union territory for Jammu and Kashmir is being created. The Union territory of Jammu and Kashmir will be with a legislature.

ADMINISTRATION OF UNION TERRITORIES:
Articles 239 to 241 in Part VIII of the Constitution deal with the union territories. Even though all the union territories belong to one category, there is no uniformity in their administrative system. Every union territory is administered by the President acting through an administrator appointed by him. An administrator of a union territory is an agent of the President and not head of state like a governor. The President can specify the designation of an administrator; it may be Lieutenant Governor or Chief Commissioner or Administrator. At present, it is Lieutenant Governor in the case of Delhi, Puducherry, Andaman and Nicobar Islands, Jammu and Kashmir and Ladakh and Administrator in the case of Chandigarh, Dadra and Nagar Haveli, Daman and Diu and Lakshadweep. The President can also appoint the governor of a state as the administrator of an adjoining union territory. In that capacity, the governor is to act independently of his council of ministers.

The Union Territories of Puducherry (in 1963), Delhi (in 1992) and Jammu and Kashmir (in 2019) are provided with a legislative assembly4 and a council of ministers headed by a chief minister. The remaining six union territories do not have such popular political institutions. But, the establishment of such institutions in the union territories does not diminish the supreme control of the president and Parliament over them.

The Parliament can make laws on any subject of the three lists (including the State List) for the union territories. This power of Parliament also extends to Puducherry, Delhi and Jammu and Kashmir, which have their own local legislatures. This means that, the legislative power of Parliament for the union territories on subjects of the State List remain unaffected even after establishing a local legislature for them. But, the legislative assembly of Puducherry can also make laws on any subject of the State List and the Concurrent List. Similarly, the legislative assembly of Delhi can make laws on any subject of the State List (except public order, police and land) and the Concurrent List. Likewise, the legislative assembly of Jammu and Kashmir can make laws on any subject of the State List (except public order and police) and the Concurrent List.

The President can make regulations for the peace, progress and good government of the Andaman and Nicobar Islands, Lakshadweep, Dadra and Nagar Haveli, Daman and Diu and Ladakh. In the case of Puducherry also, the President can legislate by making regulations but only when the assembly is suspended or dissolved. A regulation made by the President has the same force and effect as an act of Parliament and can also repeal or amend any act of Parliament in relation to these union territories.

The Parliament can establish a high court for a union territory or put it under the jurisdiction of the high court of adjacent state. Delhi is the only union territory that has a high court of its own (since 1966). The Bombay High Court has got jurisdiction over two union territo-ries–Dadra and Nagar Haveli, and Daman and Diu. Andaman and Nocobar Islands, Chandigarh, Lakshadweep and Puducherry are placed under the Calcutta, Punjab and Haryana, Kerala, and Madras High Courts respectively. The Jammu and Kashmir High Court is the common high court for the two union territories of Jammu and Kashmir, and Ladakh. The Constitution does not contain any separate provisions for the administration of acquired territories. But, the constitutional provisions for the administration of union territories also apply to the acquired territories.

SPECIAL PROVISIONS FOR DELHI:
The 69th Constitutional Amendment Act of 19915 provided a special status to the Union Territory of Delhi, and redesignated it the National Capital Territory of Delhi and designated the administrator of Delhi as the lieutenant (lt.) governor. It created a legislative assembly and a council of ministers for Delhi. Previously, Delhi had a metropolitan council and an executive council.
The strength of the assembly is fixed at 70 members, directly elected by the people. The elections are conducted by the election commission of India. The assembly can make laws on all the matters of the State List and the Concurrent List except the three matters of the State List, that is, public order, police and land. But, the laws of Parliament prevail over those made by the Assembly. The strength of the council of ministers is fixed at ten per cent of the total strength of the assembly, that is, seven–one chief minister and six other ministers. The chief minister is appointed by the President (not by the lt. governor). The other ministers are appointed by the president on the advice of the chief minister. The ministers hold office during the pleasure of the president. The council of ministers is collectively responsible to the assembly. The council of ministers headed by the chief minister aid and advise the lt. governor in the exercise of his functions except in so far as he is required to act in his discretion. In the case of difference of opinion between the lt. governor and his ministers, the lt. governor is to refer the matter to the president for decision and act accordingly.

When a situation arises in which the administration of the territory cannot be carried on in accordance with the above provisions, the president can suspend their (above provisions) operation and make the necessary incidental or consequential provisions for administering the territory. In brief, in case of failure of constitutional machinery, the president can impose his rule in the territory. This can be done on the report of the lt. governor or otherwise. This provision resembles Article 356 which deals with the imposition of President’s Rule in the states. The lt. governor is empowered to promulgate ordinances during recess of the assembly. An ordinance has the same force as an act of the assembly. Every such ordinance must be approved by the assembly within six weeks from its reassembly. He can also withdraw an ordinance at any time. But, he cannot promulgate an ordinance when the assembly is dissolved or suspended. Further, no such ordinance can be promulgated or withdrawn without the prior permission of the President.

ADVISORY COMMITTEES OF UNION TERRITORIES:
Under the Government of India (Allocation of Business) Rules 1961, Ministry of Home Affairs is the nodal ministry for all matters of Union Territories relating to legislation, finance and budget, services and appointment of Lt. Governors and Administrators. All the six UTs without legislature (Andaman and Nicobar Islands, Chandigarh, Daman and Diu, Dadra and Nagar Haveli, Lakshadweep and Ladakh) have the forum of Home Minister’s Advisory Committee (HMAC)/Administrator’s Advisory Committee (AAC). While HMAC is chaired by the Union Home Minister, AAC is chaired by the Administrator of the concerned UTs. The Member of Parliament and elected members from the local bodies e.g. District Panchayats and Municipal Council of the respective UTs are members of these committees among others. The Committee discusses the general issues relating to social and economic development of the UTs.

The Governor of Punjab is concurrently the Administrator of Chandigarh. The Administrator of Dadra and Nagar Haveli is concurrently the Administrator of Daman and Diu. Lakshadweep has a separate Administrator.

Scheduled and Tribal Areas:
Article 244 in Part X of the Constitution envisages a special system of administration for certain areas designated as ‘scheduled areas’ and ‘tribal areas’. The Fifth Schedule of the Constitution deals with the administration and control of scheduled areas and scheduled tribes in any state except the four states of Assam, Meghalaya, Tripura and Mizoram1. The Sixth Schedule of the Constitution, on the other hand, deals with the administration of the tribal areas in the four northeastern states of Assam, Meghalaya, Tripura and Mizoram.

ADMINISTRATION OF SCHEDULED AREAS:
‘The scheduled areas are treated differently from the other areas in the country because they are inhabited by ‘aboriginals’ who are socially and economically rather backward, and special efforts need to be made to improve their condition. Therefore, the whole of the normal administrative machinery operating in a state is not extended to the scheduled areas and the Central government has somewhat greater responsibility for these areas’.
The various features of administration contained in the Fifth Schedule are as follows:
1. Declaration of Scheduled Areas: The president is empowered to declare an area to be a scheduled area. He can also increase or decrease its area, alter its boundary lines, rescind such designation or make fresh orders for such redesignation on an area in consultation with the governor of the state concerned.
2. Executive Power of State and Centre: The executive power of a state extends to the scheduled areas therein. But the governor has a special responsibility regarding such areas. He has to submit a report to the president regarding the administration of such areas, annually or whenever so required by the president. The executive power of the Centre extends to giving directions to the states regarding the administration of such areas.
3. Tribes Advisory Council: Each state having scheduled areas has to establish a tribes advisory council to advise on welfare and advancement of the scheduled tribes. It is to consist of 20 members, three-fourths of whom are to be the representatives of the scheduled tribes in the state legislative assembly. A similar council can also be established in a state having scheduled tribes but not scheduled areas therein, if the president so directs.
4. Law applicable to Scheduled Areas: The governor is empowered to direct that any particular act of Parliament or the state legislature does not apply to a scheduled area or apply with specified modifications and exceptions. He can also make regulations for the peace and good government of a scheduled area after consulting the tribes advisory council. Such regulations may prohibit or restrict the transfer of land by or among members of the scheduled tribes, regulate the allotment of land to members of the scheduled tribes and regulate the business of money-lending in relation to the scheduled tribes. Also, a regulation may repeal or amend any act of Parliament or the state legislature, which is applicable to a scheduled area. But, all such regulations require the assent of the president.

The Constitution requires the president to appoint a commission to report on the administration of the scheduled areas and the welfare of the scheduled tribes in the states. He can appoint such a commission at any time but compulsorily after ten years of the commencement of the Constitution. Hence, a commission was appointed in 1960. It was headed by U.N. Dhebar and submitted its report in 1961. After four decades, the second commission was appointed in 2002 under the chairmanship of Dilip Singh Bhuria. It submitted its report in 2004.

ADMINISTRATION OF TRIBAL AREAS:
The Constitution, under Sixth Schedule, contains special provisions for the administration of tribal areas in the four northeastern states of Assam, Meghalaya, Tripura and Mizoram. The rationality behind the special arrangements in respect of only these four states lies in the following:
“The tribes in Assam, Meghalaya, Tripura and Mizoram have not assimilated much the life and ways of the other people in these states. These areas have hitherto been anthropological specimens. The tribal people in other parts of India have more or less adopted the culture of the majority of the people in whose midst they live. The tribes in Assam, Meghalaya, Tripura and Mizoram, on the other hand, still have their roots in their own culture, customs and civilization. These areas are, therefore, treated differently by the Constitution and sizeable amount of autonomy has been given to these people for selfgovernment.”
The various features of administration contained in the Sixth Schedule are as follows:
1. The tribal areas in the four states of Assam, Meghalaya, Tripura and Mizoram have been constituted as autonomous districts. But, they do not fall outside the executive authority of the state concerned.
2. The governor is empowered to organise and re-organise the autonomous districts. Thus, he can increase or decrease their areas or change their names or define their boundaries and so on.
3. If there are different tribes in an autonomous district, the governor can divide the district into several autonomous regions.
4. Each autonomous district has a district council consisting of 30 members, of whom four are nominated by the governor and the remaining 26 are elected on the basis of adult franchise. The elected members hold office for a term of five years (unless the council is dissolved earlier) and nominated members hold office during the pleasure of the governor. Each autonomous region also has a separate regional council.
5. The district and regional councils administer the areas under their jurisdiction. They can make laws on certain specified matters like land, forests, canal water, shifting cultivation, village administration, inheritance of property, marriage and divorce, social customs and so on. But all such laws require the assent of the governor.
6. The district and regional councils within their territorial jurisdictions can constitute village councils or courts for trial of suits and cases between the tribes. They hear appeals from them. The jurisdiction of high court over these suits and cases is specified by the governor.
7. The district council can establish, construct or manage primary schools, dispensaries, markets, ferries, fisheries, roads and so on in the district. It can also make regulations for the control of money lending and trading by nontribals. But, such regulations require the assent of the governor.
8. The district and regional councils are empowered to assess and collect land revenue and to impose certain specified taxes.
9. The acts of Parliament or the state legislature do not apply to autonomous districts and autonomous regions or apply with specified modifications and exceptions. 
10. The governor can appoint a commission to examine and report on any matter relating to the administration of the autonomous districts or regions. He may dissolve a district or regional council on the recommendation of the commission.

Lushai Hills District (Change of Name) Act, 1954:
Renamed the Lushai Hills District as the Mizo District. The Lushai Hills District was one of the six autonomous districts in the tribal areas of Assam specified in the Sixth Schedule of the Constitution. 

Election Commission:
The Election Commission is a permanent and an independent body established by the Constitution of India directly to ensure free and fair elections in the country. Article 324 of the Constitution provides that the power of superintendence, direction and control of elections to parliament, state legislatures, the office of president of India and the office of vice-president of India shall be vested in the election commission. Thus, the Election Commission is an all-India body in the sense that it is common to both the Central government and the state governments.
It must be noted here that the election commission is not concerned with the elections to panchayats and municipalities in the states. For this, the Constitution of India provides for a separate State Election Commission.

COMPOSITION OF ELECTION COMMISSION:
Article 324 of the Constitution has made the following provisions with regard to the composition of election commission:
1. The Election Commission shall consist of the chief election commissioner and such number of other election commissioners, if any, as the president may from time to time fix.
2. The appointment of the chief election commissioner and other election commissioners shall be made by the president.
3. When any other election commissioner is so appointed, the chief election commissioner shall act as the chairman of the election commission.
4. The president may also appoint after consultation with the election commission such regional commissioners as he may consider necessary to assist the election commission.
5. The conditions of service and tenure of office of the election commissioners and the regional commissioners shall be determined by the president.

Since its inception in 1950 and till 15 October 1989, the election commission functioned as a single member body consisting of the Chief Election Commissioner. On 16 October 1989, the president appointed two more election commissioners to cope with the increased work of the election commission on account of lowering of the voting age from 21 to 18 years.2 Thereafter, the Election Commission functioned as a multimember body consisting of three election commissioners. However, the two posts of election commissioners were abolished in January 1990 and the Election Commission was reverted to the earlier position. Again in October 1993, the president appointed two more election commissioners. Since then and till today, the Election Commission has been functioning as a multi-member body consisting of three election commissioners.

The chief election commissioner and the two other election commissioners have equal powers and receive equal salary, allowances and other perquisites, which are similar to those of a judge of the Supreme Court.3 In case of difference of opinion amongst the Chief Election Commissioner and/or two other election commissioners, the matter is decided by the Commission by majority. They hold office for a term of six years or until they attain the age of 65 years, whichever is earlier. They can resign at any time or can also be removed before the expiry of their term.

INDEPENDENCE AND IMPARTIAL FUNCTIONING OF THE ELECTION COMMISSION:
Article 324 of the Constitution has made the following provisions to safeguard and ensure the independent and impartial functioning of the Election Commission:
1. The chief election commissioner is provided with the security of tenure. He cannot be removed from his office except in same manner and on the same grounds as a judge of the Supreme Court. In other words, he can be removed by the president on the basis of a resolution passed to that effect by both the Houses of Parliament with special majority, either on the ground of proved misbehaviour or incapacity. Thus, he does not hold his office till the pleasure of the president, though he is appointed by him.
2. The service conditions of the chief election commissioner cannot be varied to his disadvantage after his appointment.
3. Any other election commissioner or a regional commissioner cannot be removed from office except on the recommendation of the chief election commissioner.

Though the constitution has sought to safeguard and ensure the independence and impartiality of the Election Commission, some flaws can be noted, viz.,
1. The Constitution has not prescribed the qualifications (legal, educational, administrative or judicial) of the members of the Election Commission.
2. The Constitution has not specified the term of the members of the Election Commission.
3. The Constitution has not debarred the retiring election commissioners from any further appointment by the government.

POWERS AND FUNCTIONS OF THE ELECTION COMMISSION:
The powers and functions of the Election Commission with regard to elections to the Parliament, state legislatures and offices of President and Vice-President can be classified into three categories, viz,
1. Administrative
2. Advisory
3. Quasi-Judicial
In detail, these powers and functions are:
1. To determine the territorial areas of the electoral constituencies throughout the country on the basis of the Delimitation Commission Act of Parliament.4
2. To prepare and periodically revise electoral rolls and to register all eligible voters.
3. To notify the dates and schedules of elections and to scrutinise nomination papers.
4. To grant recognition to political parties and allot election symbols to them.
5. To act as a court for settling disputes related to granting of recognition to political parties and allotment of election symbols to them.
6. To appoint officers for inquiring into disputes relating to electoral arrangements.
7. To determine the code of conduct to be observed by the parties and the candidates at the time of elections.
8. To prepare a roster for publicity of the policies of the political parties on radio and TV in times of elections.
9. To advise the president on matters relating to the disqualifications of the members of Parliament.
10. To advise the governor on matters relating to the disqualifications of the members of state legislature.
11. To cancel polls in the event of rigging, booth capturing, violence and other irregularities.
12. To request the president or the governor for requisitioning the staff necessary for conducting elections.
13. To supervise the machinery of elections throughout the country to ensure free and fair elections.
14. To advise the president whether elections can be held in a state under president’s rule in order to extend the period of emergency after one year.
15. To register political parties for the purpose of elections and grant them the status of national or state parties on the basis of their poll performance.

The Election Commission is assisted by deputy election commissioners. They are drawn from the civil service and appointed by the commission with tenure system. They are assisted, in turn, by the secretaries, joint secretaries, deputy secretaries and under secretaries posted in the secretariat of the commission.
At the state level, the Election Commission is assisted by the chief electoral officer who is appointed by the chief election commissioner in consultation with the state government. Below this, at the district level, the collector acts as the district returning officer. He appoints a returning officer for every constituency in the district and presiding officer for every polling booth in the constituency. 

VISION, MISSION AND PRINCIPLES OF THE ELECTION COMMISSION:
Vision of the Election Commission:
The Election Commission of India strives to be an Institution of Excellence by enhancing active engagement, participation; and deepening and strengthening electoral democracy in India and globally.
Mission of the Election Commission:
The Election Commission of India maintains independence, integrity and autonomy; ensures accessibility, inclusiveness, and ethical participation of stakeholders; and, adopts highest standards of professionalism for delivering free, fair, and transparent elections to strengthen the trust in electoral democracy and governance.

Guiding Principles of the Election Commission:
The Commission has laid down for itself guiding principles of good governance:
1. To uphold the values enshrined in the Constitution viz, equality, equity, impartiality, independence; and rule of law in superintendence, direction and control over the electoral governance;
2. To conduct elections with highest standard of credibility, freeness, fairness, transparency, integrity, accountability, autonomy and professionalism;
3. To ensure participation of all eligible citizens in the electoral process in an inclusive voter centric and voterfriendly environment;
4. To engage with political parties and all stakeholders in the interest of electoral process;
5. To promote awareness about the electoral process and electoral governance amongst stakeholders namely, voters, political parties, election functionaries, candidates and people at large; and to enhance and strengthen confidence and trust in the electoral system of this country;
6. To develop the human resource for effective and professional delivery of electoral services;
7. To build quality infrastructure for smooth conduct of electoral process;
8. To adopt technology for improvement in all areas of electoral process;
9. To strive for adoption of innovative practices for achieving excellence and overall realization of the vision and mission;
10. To contribute towards the reinforcement of democratic values by maintaining and reinforcing confidence and trust of the people in the electoral system of the country.

Union Public Service Commission
The Union Public Service Commission (UPSC) is the central recruiting agency in India. It is an independent constitutional body in the sense that it has been directly created by the Constitution. Articles 315 to 323 in Part XIV of the Constitution contain elaborate provisions regarding the composition, appointment and removal of members along with the independence, powers and functions of the UPSC.

Composition of Union Public Service Commission (UPSC):
The UPSC consists of a chairman and other members appointed by the president of India. The Constitution, without specifying the strength of the Commission has left the matter to the discretion of the president, who determines its composition. Usually, the Commission consists of nine to eleven members including the chairman. Further, no qualifications are prescribed for the Commission’s membership except that one-half of the members of the Commission should be such persons who have held office for at least ten years either under the Government of India or under the government of a state. The Constitution also authorises the president to determine the conditions of service of the chairman and other members of the Commission.
The chairman and members of the Commission hold office for a term of six years or until they attain the age of 65 years, whichever is earlier. However, they can relinquish their offices at any time by addressing their resignation to the president. They can also be removed before the expiry of their term by the president in the manner as provided in the Constitution.
The President can appoint one of the members of the UPSC as an acting chairman in the following two circumstances:
(a) When the office of the chairman falls vacant; or
(b) When the chairman is unable to perform his functions due to absence or some other reason.
The acting chairman functions till a person appointed as chairman enters on the duties of the office or till the chairman is able to resume his duties.

The President can remove the chairman or any other member of UPSC from the office under the following circumstances:
(a) If he is adjudged an insolvent (that is, has gone bankrupt);
(b) If he engages, during his term of office, in any paid employment outside the duties of his office; or
(c) If he is, in the opinion of the president, unfit to continue in office by reason of infirmity of mind or body.

In addition to these, the president can also remove the chairman or any other member of UPSC for misbehaviour. However, in this case, the president has to refer the matter to the Supreme Court for an enquiry. If the Supreme Court, after the enquiry, upholds the cause of removal and advises so, the president can remove the chairman or a member. Under the provisions of the Constitution, the advise tendered by the Supreme Court in this regard is binding on the president. During the course of enquiry by the Supreme Court, the president can suspend the chairman or the member of UPSC. Defining the term ‘misbehaviour’ in this context, the Constitution states that the chairman or any other member of the UPSC is deemed to be guilty of misbehaviour if he 
(a) is concerned or interested in any contract or agreement made by the Government of India or the government of a state, or 
(b) participates in any way in the profit of such contract or agreement or in any benefit therefrom otherwise than as a member and in common with other members of an incorporated company.

The Constitution has made the following provisions to safeguard and ensure the independent and impartial functioning of the UPSC:
(a) The chairman or a member of the UPSC can be removed from office by the president only in the manner and on the grounds mentioned in the Constitution. Therefore, they enjoy security of tenure.
(b) The conditions of service of the chairman or a member, though determined by the president, cannot be varied to his disadvantage after his appointment.
(c) The entire expenses including the salaries, allowances and pensions of the chairman and members of the UPSC are charged on the Consolidated Fund of India. Thus, they are not subject to vote of Parliament.
(d) The chairman of UPSC (on ceasing to hold office) is not eligible for further employment in the Government of India or a state.
(e) A member of UPSC (on ceasing to hold office) is eligible for appointment as the chairman of UPSC or a State Public Service Commission (SPSC), but not for any other employment in the Government of India or a state.
(f) The chairman or a member of UPSC is (after having completed his first term) not eligible for reappointment to that office (i.e., not eligible for second term).

The UPSC performs the following functions:
(a) It conducts examinations for appointments to the all-India services, Central services and public services of the centrally  administered territories.
(b) It assists the states (if requested by two or more states to do so) in framing and operating schemes of joint recruitment for any services for which candidates possessing special qualifications are required.
(c) It serves all or any of the needs of a state on the request of the state governor and with the approval of the president of India.
(d) It is consulted on the following matters related to personnel management:
(i) All matters relating to methods of recruitment to civil services and for civil posts.
(ii) The principles to be followed in making appointments to cadre services and posts and in making promotions and transfers from one service to another.
(iii) The suitability of candidates for appointments to civil services and posts; for promotions and transfers from one service another; and appointments by transfer or deputation. The concerned departments make recommendations for promotions and request the UPSC to ratify them.
(iv) All disciplinary matters affecting a person serving under the Government of India in a civil capacity including memorials petitions relating to such matters. These include:
– Censure (Severe disapproval)
– Withholding of increments
– Withholding of promotions
– Recovery of pecuniary loss
– Reduction to lower service or rank (Demotion)
– Compulsory retirement
– Removal from service
– Dismissal from service
(v) Any claim for reimbursement of legal expenses incurred by civil servant in defending legal proceedings instituted again him in respect of acts done in the execution of his office duties.
(vi) Any claim for the award of a pension in respect of injuries sustained by a person while serving under the Government India and any question as to the amount of any such award.
(vii) Matters of temporary appointments for period exceeding year and on regularisation of appointments.
(viii) Matters related to grant of extension of service and employment of certain retired civil servants.
(ix) Any other matter related to personnel management.

The Supreme Court has held that if the government fails to consult UPSC in the matters (mentioned above), the aggrieved public servant has no remedy in a court. In other words, the court held that any irregularity in consultation with the UPSC or acting without consultation does not invalidate the decision of the government. Thus, the provision is directory and not mandatory. Similarly, the court held that a selection by the UPSC does not confer any right to the post upon the candidate. However, the government is to act fairly and without arbitrariness or mala fides. The additional functions relating to the services of the Union can be conferred on UPSC by the Parliament. It can also place the personnel system of any authority, corporate body or public institution within the jurisdiction of the UPSC. Hence the jurisdiction of UPSC can be extended by an act made by the Parliament. The UPSC presents, annually, to the president a report on its performance. The President places this report before both the Houses of Parliament, along with a memorandum explaining the cases where the advice of the Commission was not accepted and the reasons for such non-acceptance. All such cases of nonacceptance must be approved by the Appointments Committee of the Union cabinet. An individual ministry or department has no power to reject the advice of the UPSC. 

The following matters are kept outside the functional jurisdiction of the UPSC. In other words, the UPSC is not consulted on the following matters:
(a) While making reservations of appointments or posts in favour of any backward class of citizens.
(b) While taking into consideration the claims of scheduled castes and scheduled tribes in making appointments to services and posts.
(c) With regard to the selections for chairmanship or membership of commissions or tribunals, posts of the highest diplomatic nature and a bulk of group C and group D services.
(d) With regard to the selection for temporary or officiating appointment to a post if the person appointed is not likely to hold the post for more than a year.
The president can exclude posts, services and matters from the purview of the UPSC. The Constitution states that the president, in respect to the all-India services and Central services and posts may make regulations specifying the matters in which, it shall not be necessary for UPSC to be consulted. But all such regulations made by the president shall be laid before each House of Parliament for at least 14 days. The Parliament can amend or repeal them.

Role of UPSC:
The Constitution visualises the UPSC to be the ‘watch-dog of merit system’ in India. It is concerned with the recruitment to the all-India services and Central services–group A and group B and advises the government, when consulted, on promotion and disciplinary matters. It is not concerned with the classification of services, pay and service conditions, cadre management, training, and so on. These matters are handled by the Department of Personnel and Training–one of the three departments of the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions5. Therefore, UPSC is only a central recruiting agency while the Department of Personnel and Training is the central personnel agency in India.

The role of UPSC is not only limited, but also recommendations made by it are only of advisory nature and hence, not binding on the government. It is upto the Union government to accept or reject that advise. The only safeguard is the answerability of the government to the Parliament for departing from the recommendation of the Commission. Further, the government can also make rules which regulate the scope of the advisory functions of UPSC.

The emergence of Central Vigilance Commission (CVC) in 1964 affected the role of UPSC in disciplinary matters. This is because both are consulted by the government while taking disciplinary action against a civil servant. The problem arises when the two bodies tender conflicting advise. However, the UPSC, being an independent constitutional body, has an edge over the CVC, which is created by an executive resolution of the Government of India and conferred a statutory status in October 2003.

State Public Service Commission:
Parallel to the Union Public Service Commission (UPSC) at the Centre, there is a State Public Service Commission (SPSC) in a state. The same set of Articles (i.e., 315 to 323 in Part XIV) of the Constitution also deal with the composition, appointment and removal of members, power and functions and independence of a SPSC.

Composition of State Public Service Commission:
A State Public Service Commission consists of a chairman and other members appointed by the governor of the state. The Constitution does not specify the strength of the Commission but has left the matter to the discretion of the Governor. Further, no qualifications are prescribed for the commission’s membership except that one-half of the members of the commission should be such persons who have held office for at least ten years either under the government of India or under the Government of a state. The Constitution also authorises the governor to determine the conditions of service of the chairman and members of the Commission.
The chairman and members of the Commission hold office for a term of six years or until they attain the age of 62 years , whichever is earlier (in the case of UPSC, the age limit is 65 years). However, they can relinquish their offices at any time by addressing their resignation to the governor.
The governor can appoint one of the members of the SPSC as an acting chairman in the following two circumstances:
(a) When the office of the chairman falls vacant; or
(b) When the chairman is unable to perform his functions due to absence or some other reason.
The acting chairman functions till the person appointed as chairman enters on the duties of the office or till the chairman is able to resume his duties.

Removal of members of State Public Service Commission:
Although the chairman and members of a SPSC are appointed by the governor, they can be removed only by the president (and not by the governor). The president can remove them on the same grounds and in the same manner as he can remove a chairman or a member of the UPSC. Thus, he can remove him under the following circumstances:
(a) If he is adjudged an insolvent (i.e., has gone bankrupt); or
(b) If he engages, during his term of office, in any paid employment outside the duties of his office; or
(c) If he is, in the opinion of the president, unfit to continue in office by reason of infirmity of mind or body.
In addition to these, the president can also remove the chairman or any other member of SPSC for misbehaviour. However, in this case, the president has to refer the matter to the Supreme Court for an enquiry. If the Supreme Court, after the enquiry, upholds the cause of removal and advises so, the president can remove the chairman or a member. Under the provisions of the Constitution, the advise tendered by the Supreme Court in this regard is binding on the president. However, during the course of enquiry by the Supreme Court, the governor can suspend the concerned chairman or member, pending the final removal order of the president on receipt of the report of the Supreme Court.
Further, the Constitution has also defined the term ‘misbehaviour’ in this context. The Constitution states that the chairman or any other member of a SPSC is deemed to be guilty of misbehaviour, if he 
(a) is concerned or interested in any contract or agreement made by the Government of India or the government of a state, or 
(b) participates in any way in the profit of such contract or agreement or in any benefit therefrom otherwise than as a member and in common with other members of an incorporated company. 


As in the case of UPSC, the Constitution has made the following provisions to safeguard and ensure the independent and impartial functioning of a SPSC:
(a) The chairman or a member of a SPSC can be removed from office by the president only in the manner and on the grounds mentioned in the Constitution. Therefore, they enjoy the security of tenure.
(b) The conditions of service of the chairman or a member, though determined by the governor, cannot be varied to his disadvantage after his appointment.
(c) The entire expense including the salaries, allowances and pensions of the chairman and members of a SPSC are charged on the consolidated fund of the state. Thus, they are not subject to vote of the state legislature.
(d) The chairman of a SPSC (on ceasing to hold office) is eligible for appointment as the chairman or a member of the UPSC or as the chairman of any other SPSC, but not for any other employment under the Government of India or a state.
(e) A member of a SPSC (on ceasing to hold office) is eligible for appointment as the chairman or a member of the UPSC, or as the chairman of that SPSC or any other SPSC, but not for any other employment under the Government of India or a state.
(f) The chairman or a member of a SPSC is (after having completed his first term) not eligible for reappointment to that office (that is, not eligible for second term).

Functions of State Public Service Commission:
A SPSC performs all those functions in respect of the state services as the UPSC does in relation to the Central services:
(a) It conducts examinations for appointments to the services of the state.
(b) It is consulted on the following matters related to personnel management:
(i) All matters relating to methods of recruitment to civil services and for civil posts.
(ii) The principles to be followed in making appointments to cadre services and posts and in making promotions and transfers from one service to another.
(iii) The suitability of candidates for appointments to civil services and posts; for promotions and transfers from one service another; and appointments by transfer or deputation. The concerned departments make recommendations for promotions and request the SPSC to ratify them.
(iv) All disciplinary matters affecting a person serving under the government of the state in a civil capacity including memorials petitions relating to such matters. These include:
– Censure (severe disapproval)
– Withholding of increments
– Withholding of promotions
– Recovery of pecuniary loss
– Reduction to lower service or rank (demotion)
– Compulsory retirement
– Removal from service
– Dismissal from service
(v) Any claim for reimbursement of legal expenses incurred by civil servant in defending legal proceedings instituted again him in respect of acts done in the execution of his official duties 
(vi) Any claim for the award of a pension in respect of injuries sustained by a person while serving under the government the state and any question as to the amount of any such award
(vii) Any other matter related to the personnel management.
The Supreme Court has held that if the government fails to consult the SPSC in these matters, the aggrieved public servant has no remedy in a court. In other words, the court held that any irregularity in consultation with the SPSC or acting without consultation does not invalidate the decision of the government.
Thus, the provision is directory and not mandatory. Similarly, the court held that a selection by the SPSC does not confer any right to the post upon the candidate. However, the government is to act fairly and without arbitrariness or malafides.
The additional functions relating to the services of the state can be conferred on SPSC by the state legislature. It can also place the personnel system of any local authority, corporate body or public institution within the jurisdiction of the SPSC. Hence the jurisdiction of SPSC can be extended by an Act made by the state legislature.
The SPSC presents, annually, to the governor a report on its performance. The governor places this report before both the Houses of the state legislature, along with a memorandum explaining the cases where the advice of the Commission was not accepted and the reasons for such non-acceptance. 

The following matters are kept outside the functional jurisdiction of the SPSC. In other words, the SPSC is not consulted on the following matters:
(a) While making reservations of appointments or posts in favour of any backward class of citizens.
(b) While taking into consideration the claims of scheduled castes and scheduled tribes in making appointments to services and posts.
The governor can exclude posts, services and matters from the purview of the SPSC. The Constitution states that the governor, in respect to the state services and posts may make regulations specifying the matters in which, it shall not be necessary for SPSC to be consulted. But all such regulations made by the governor shall be laid before each House of the state legislature for at least 14 days. The state legislature can amend or repeal them.

Role of State Public Service Commission:
The Constitution visualises the SPSC to be the ‘watchdog of merit
system’ in the state. It is concerned with the recruitment to the state services and advises the government, when consulted, on promotion and disciplinary matters. It is not concerned with the classification of services, pay and service conditions, cadre management, training and so on. These matters are handled by the Department of Personnel or the General Administration Department. Therefore, the SPSC is only a central recruiting agency in the state while the Department of Personnel or the General Administration Department is the central personnel agency in the state.
The role of SPSC is not only limited, but also recommendations made by it are only of advisory nature and hence, not binding on the government. It is up to the state government to accept or reject that advice. The only safeguard is the answerability of the government to the state legislature for departing from the recommendation of the Commission. Further, the government can also make rules which regulate the scope of the advisory functions of SPSC.
Also, the emergence of State Vigilance Commission (SVC) in 1964 affected the role of SPSC in disciplinary matters. This is because both are consulted by the government while taking disciplinary action against a civil servant. The problem arises when the two bodies tender conflicting advice. However, the SPSC, being an independent constitutional body, has an edge over the SVC.
Finally, the SPSC is consulted by the governor while framing rules for appointment to judicial service of the state other than the posts of district judges. In this regard, the concerned state high court is also consulted.

JOINT STATE PUBLIC SERVICE COMMISSION:
The Constitution makes a provision for the establishment of a Joint State Public Service Commission (JSPSC) for two or more states. While the UPSC and the SPSC are created directly by the Constitution, a JSPSC can be created by an act of Parliament on the request of the state legislatures concerned. Thus, a JSPSC is a statutory and not a constitutional body. The two states of Punjab and Haryana had a JSPSC for a short period, after the creation of Haryana out of Punjab in 1966.
The chairman and members of a JSPSC are appointed by the president. They hold office for a term of six years or until they attain the age of 62 years, whichever is earlier. They can be suspended or removed by the president. They can also resign from their offices at any time by submitting their resignation letters to the president. The number of members of a JSPSC and their conditions of service are determined by the president.
A JSPSC presents its annual performance report to each of the concerned state governors. Each governor places the report before the state legislature.
The UPSC can also serve the needs of a state on the request of the state governor and with the approval of the president. As provided by the Government of India Act of 1919, a Central Public Service Commission was set up in 1926 and entrusted with the task of recruiting civil servants. The Government of India Act of 1935 provided for the establishment of not only a Federal Public Service Commission but also a Provincial Public Service Commission and Joint Public Service Commission for two or more provinces.

Finance Commission:
Article 280 of the Constitution of India provides for a Finance Commission as a quasi judicial body. It is constituted by the president of India every fifth year or at such earlier time as he considers necessary.

Composition of Finance Commission:
The Finance Commission consists of a chairman and four other members to be appointed by the president. They hold office for such period as specified by the president in his order. They are eligible for reappointment.
The Constitution authorises the Parliament to determine the qualifications of members of the commission and the manner in which they should be selected. Accordingly, the Parliament has specified the qualifications of the chairman and members of the com-mission. The chairman should be a person having experience in public affairs and the four other members should be selected from amongst the following:
1. A judge of high court or one qualified to be appointed as one.
2. A person who has specialised knowledge of finance and accounts of the government.
3. A person who has wide experience in financial matters and in administration.
4. A person who has special knowledge of economics.

Functions of Finance Commission:
The Finance Commission is required to make recommendations to the president of India on the following matters:
1. The distribution of the net proceeds of taxes to be shared between the Centre and the states, and the allocation between the states of the respective shares of such proceeds.
2. The principles that should govern the grants-in-aid to the states by the Centre (i.e., out of the consolidated fund of India).
3. The measures needed to augment the consolidated fund of a state to supplement the resources of the panchayats and the municipalities in the state on the basis of the recommendations
made by the state finance commission. 
4. Any other matter referred to it by the president in the interests of sound finance.
Till 1960, the commission also suggested the grants given to the States of Assam, Bihar, Odisha and West Bengal in lieu of assignment of any share of the net proceeds in each year of export duty on jute and jute products. These grants were to be given for a temporary period of ten years from the commencement of the Constitution. The commission submits its report to the president. He lays it before both the Houses of Parliament along with an explanatory memorandum as to the action taken on its recommendations.

It must be clarified here that the recommendations made by the Finance Commission are only of advisory nature and hence, not binding on the government. It is up to the Union government to implement its recommendations on granting money to the states.
To put it in other words, ‘It is nowhere laid down in the Constitution that the recommendations of the commission shall be binding upon the Government of India or that it would give rise to a legal right in favour of the beneficiary states to receive the money recommended to be offered to them by the Commission’.
As rightly observed by Dr. P.V. Rajamannar, the Chairman of the Fourth Finance Commission, “Since the Finance Commission is a constitutional body expected to be quasijudicial, its recommendations should not be turned down by the Government of India unless there are very compelling reasons”.

The Constitution of India envisages the Finance commission as the balancing wheel of fiscal federalism in India. However, till 2014, its role in the Centre-state fiscal relations was undermined by the erstwhile Planning Commission, a non-constitutional and a non-statutory body. Dr. P.V. Rajamannar, the Chairman of the Fourth Finance commission, highlighted the overlapping of functions and responsibilities between the Finance Commission and the erstwhile Planning Commission in federal fiscal trans-fers.4 In 2015, the Planning Commission was replaced by a new body called NITI Aayog (National Institution for Transforming India).

Goods and Services Tax Council (GST):
Establishment of the council Goods and Services Tax (GST) Council:
The 101st Amendment Act of 2016 paved the way for the introduction of a new tax regime (i.e. goods and services tax - GST) in the country. The smooth and efficient administration of this tax requires co-operation and coordination between the centre and the states. In order to facilitate this consultation process, the amendment provided for the establishment of a Goods and Services Tax Council or the GST Council.
The amendment inserted a new Article 279-A in the Constitution. This Article empowered the President to constitute a GST Council by an order. Accordingly, the President issued the order in 2016 and constituted the Council.
The Secretariat of the Council is located at New Delhi. The Union Revenue Secretary acts as the ex-officio Secretary to the Council.

Vision and mission of the Goods and Services Tax (GST) Council:
While discharging its functions, the Council is to be guided by the need for a harmonised structure of GST and the development of a harmonised national market for goods and services. Further, the Council has to determine the procedure in the performance of its functions. The vision and mission of the Council are as follows: Vision: To establish the highest standards of co-operative federation in the functioning of the Council, which is the first constitutional federal body vested with powers to take all major decisions relating to GST.
Mission: Evolving by a process of wider consultation, a GST structure, which is information technology driven and user friendly.

Composition of the council the Goods and Services Tax Council (GST):
The Council is a joint forum of the centre and the states and consists of the following members:
(a) The Union Finance Minister as the Chairperson
(b) The Union Minister of State in-charge of Revenue or Finance
(c) The Minister in-charge of Finance or Taxation or any other Minister nominated by each state government
The members of the Council from the states have to choose one amongst themselves to be the Vice-Chairperson of the Council. They can also decide his term.
The Union Cabinet also decided to include the Chairperson of the Central Board of Excise and Customs (CBEC) as a permanent invitee (non-voting) to all proceedings of the Council.

Working of the Goods and Services Tax (GST) Council:
The decisions of the Council are taken at its meetings. One-half of the total number of members of the Council is the quorum for conducting a meeting. Every decision of the Council is to be taken by a majority of not less than three-fourths of the weighted votes of the members present and voting at the meeting. The decision is taken in accordance with the following principles:
(i) The vote of the central government shall have a weightage one-third of the total votes cast in that meeting.
(ii) The votes of all the state governments combined shall have weightage of two-thirds of the total votes cast in that meeting.
Any act or proceedings of the Council will not become invalid on the following grounds:
(i) any vacancy or defect in the constitution of the Council; or
(ii) any defect in the appointment of a person as a member of the Council; or
(iii) any procedural irregularity of the Council not affecting the meris of the case.

Functions of the Goods and Services Tax (GST) Council:
The Council is required to make recommendations to the centre and the states on the following matters:
(a) The taxes, cesses and surcharges levied by the centre, the states and the local bodies that would get merged in GST.
(b) The goods and services that may be subjected to GST or exempted from GST.
(c) Model GST Laws, principles of levy, apportionment of GST levied on supplies in the course of inter-state trade or commerce and the principles that govern the place of supply.
(d) The threshold limit of turnover below which goods and services may be exempted from GST.
(e) The rates including floor rates with bands of GST.
(f) Any special rate or rates for a specified period to raise additional resources during any natural calamity or disaster.
(g) Special provision with respect to the states of Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Jammu and Kashmir4 , Manipur, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland, Sikkim, Tripura, Himachal Pradesh and Uttarakhand.
(h) Any other matter relating to GST, as the Council may decide.

Other functions of the Goods and Services Tax (GST) Council:
In addition to the above, the Council has the following other functions:
1. The Council shall recommend the date on which the GST may be levied on petroleum crude, high speed diesel, motor spirit (petrol), natural gas and aviation turbine fuel.
2. When there is a dispute with respect to its recommendations or their implementation, the Council shall establish a mechanism to adjudicate upon the dispute:
(a) between the centre and one or more states; or
(b) between the centre and any state or states on one side and one or more other states on the other side; or
(c) between two or more states.
3. The Council has to recommend the compensation to the states for loss of revenue arising on account of introduction of GST for a period of five years. Based on this recommendation, the Parliament determines the compensation. Accordingly, the Parliament enacted the law in 2017.

National Commission for SCs:
The National Commission for Scheduled Castes (SCs) is a constitutional body in the sense that it is directly established by Article 338 of the Constitu-tion1. On the other hand, the other national commissions like the National Commission for Women (1992), the National Commission for Minorities (1993), the National Human Rights Commission (1993) and the National Commission for Protection of Child Rights (2007) are statutory bodies in the sense that they are established by acts of the Parliament.

Evolution of the National Commission for SCs:
Originally, Article 338 of the Constitution provided for the appointment of a Special Officer for Scheduled Castes (SCs) and Scheduled Tribes (STs) to investigate all matters relating to the constitutional safeguards for the SCs and STs and to report to the President on their working3. He was designated as the Commissioner for SCs and STs and assigned the said duty.
In 1978, the Government (through a Resolution) set up a nonstatutory multimember Commission for SCs and STs; the Office of Commissioner for SCs and STs also continued to exist. In 1987, the Government (through another Resolution) modified the functions of the Commission and renamed it as the National Commission for SCs and STs.
Later, the 65th Constitutional Amendment Act of 19905 provided for the establishment of a high level multi-member National Commission for SCs and STs in the place of a single Special Officer for SCs and STs. This constitutional body replaced the Commissioner for SCs and STs as well as the Commission set up under the Resolution of 1987.
Again, the 89th Constitutional Amendment Act of 20036 bifurcated the combined National Commission for SCs and STs into two separate bodies, namely, National Commission for Scheduled Castes (under Article 338) and National Commission for Scheduled Tribes (under Article 338-A).
The separate National Commission for SCs came into existence in 2004. It consists of a chairperson, a vice-chairperson and three other members. They are appointed by the President by warrant under his hand and seal. Their conditions of service and tenure of office are also determined by the President.

Functions of the National Commission for SCs:
The functions of the Commission are:
(a) To investigate and monitor all matters relating to the constitutional and other legal safeguards for the SCs and to evaluate their working;
(b) To inquire into specific complaints with respect to the deprivation of rights and safeguards of the SCs;
(c) To participate and advise on the planning process of socioeconomic development of the SCs and to evaluate the progress of their development under the Union or a state;
(d) To present to the President, annually and at such other times as it may deem fit, reports upon the working of those safeguards;
(e) To make recommendations as to the measures that should be taken by the Union or a state for the effective implementation of those safeguards and other measures for the protection, welfare and socio-economic development of the SCs; and
(f) To discharge such other functions in relation to the protection, welfare and development and advancement of the SCs as the president may specify.

Report of the National Commission for SCs:
The commission presents an annual report to the president. It can also submit a report as and when it thinks necessary. The President places all such reports before the Parliament, along with a memorandum explaining the action taken on the recommendations made by the Commission. The memorandum should also contain the reasons for the non-acceptance of any of such recommendations.
The President also forwards any report of the Commission pertaining to a state government to the state governor. The governor places it before the state legislature, along with a memorandum explaining the action taken on the recommendations of the Commission. The memorandum should also contain the reasons for the non-acceptance of any of such recommendations.

Powers of the National Commission for SCs:
The Commission is vested with the power to regulate its own procedure. The Commission, while investigating any matter or inquiring into any complaint, has all the powers of a civil court trying a suit and in particular in respect of the following matters:
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person from any part of India and examining him on oath;
(b) requiring the discovery and production of any document;
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;
(d) requisitioning any public record from any court or office;
(e) issuing summons for the examination of witnesses and documents; and
(f) any other matter which the President may determine.
The Central government and the state governments are required to consult the Commission on all major policy matters affecting the SCs.
The Commission is also required to discharge similar functions with regard to the Anglo-Indian Community as it does with respect to the SCs. In other words, the Commission has to investigate all matters relating to the constitutional and other legal safeguards for the Anglo-Indian Community and report to the President upon their working.
Till 2018, the commission was also required to discharge similar functions with regard to the other backward classes (OBCs). It was relieved from this responsibility by the 102nd Amendment Act of 2018.

National Commission for STs: 
Like the National Commission for Schedules Castes (SCs), the National Commission for Scheduled Tribes (STs) is also a constitutional body in the sense that it is directly established by Article 338-A of the Constitution.

SEPARATE COMMISSION FOR STS:
The National Commission for SCs and STs came into being consequent upon passing of the 65th Constitutional Amendment Act of 1990. The Commission was established under Article 338 of the Constitution with the objective of monitoring all the safeguards provided for the SCs and STs under the Constitution or other laws.
Geographically and culturally, the STs are different from the SCs and their problems are also different from those of SCs. In 1999, a new Ministry of Tribal Affairs was created to provide a sharp focus to the welfare and development of the STs. It was felt necessary that the Ministry of Tribal Affairs should coordinate all activities relating to the STs as it would not be administratively feasible for the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment to perform this role.
Hence, in order to safeguard the interests of the STs more effectively, it was proposed to set up a separate National Commission for STs by bifurcating the existing combined National Commission for SCs and STs. This was done by passing the 89th Constitutional Amendment Act of 20035. This Act further amended Article 338 and inserted a new Article 338-A in the Constitution. The separate National Commission for STs came into existence in 2004. It consists of a chairperson, a vice-chairperson and three other members. They are appointed by the President by warrant under his hand and seal. Their conditions of service and tenure of office are also determined by the President.

Functions of the National Commission for STs:
The functions of the National Commission for STs are:
(a) To investigate and monitor all matters relating to the constitutional and other legal safeguards for the STs and to evaluate their working;
(b) To inquire into specific complaints with respect to the deprivation of rights and safeguards of the STs;
(c) To participate and advise on the planning process of socioeconomic development of the STs and to evaluate the progress of their development under the Union or a state;
(d) To present to the President, annually and at such other times as it may deem fit, reports upon the working of those safeguards;
(e) To make recommendations as to the measures that should be taken by the Union or a state for the effective implementation of those safeguards and other measures for
the protection, welfare and socio-economic development of the STs; and 
(f) To discharge such other functions in relation to the protection, welfare and development and advancement of the STs as the President may specify.

Other functions of the  National Commission for STs:
In 2005, the President specified the following other functions of the Commission in relation to the protection, welfare and development and advancement of the STs:
(i) Measures to be taken over conferring ownership rights in respect of minor forest produce to STs living in forest areas
(ii) Measures to be taken to safeguard rights of the tribal communities over mineral resources, water resources etc., as per law
(iii) Measures to be taken for the development of tribals and to work for more viable livelihood strategies
(iv) Measures to be taken to improve the efficacy of relief and rehabilitation measures for tribal groups displaced by development projects
(v) Measures to be taken to prevent alienation of tribal people from land and to effectively rehabilitate such people in whose case alienation has already taken place
(vi) Measures to be taken to elicit maximum cooperation and involvement of tribal communities for protecting forests and undertaking social afforestation
(vii) Measures to be taken to ensure full implementation of the Provisions of Panchayats (Extension to the Scheduled Areas) Act, 1996
(viii) Measures to be taken to reduce and ultimately eliminate the practice of shifting cultivation by tribals that lead to their continuous disempowerment and degradation of land and the environment

Report of the  National Commission for STs:
The National Commission for STs presents an annual report to the President. It can also submit a report as and when it thinks necessary. The President places all such reports before the Parliament, along with a memorandum explaining the action taken on the recommendations made by the Commission. The memorandum should also contain the reasons for the non-acceptance of any of such recommendations.
The President also forwards any report of the Commission pertaining to a state government to the state governor. The governor places it before the state legislature, along with a memorandum explaining the action taken on the recommendations of the Commission. The memorandum should also contain the reasons for the non-acceptance of any of such recommendations.

Powers of the National Commission for STs:
The National Commission for STs is vested with the power to regulate its own procedure. The Commission, while investigating any matter or inquiring into any complaint, has all the powers of a civil court trying a suit and in particular in respect of the following matters:
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person from any part of India and examining him on oath;
(b) requiring the discovery and production of any document;
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;
(d) requisitioning any public record from any court or office;
(e) issuing summons for the examination of witnesses and documents; and
(f) any other matter which the President may determine.
The Central government and the state governments are required to consult the Commission on all major policy matters affecting the STs.


National Commission for OBCs:

Establishment of the National Commission for OBCs:
In the Mandal case judgement (1992), the Supreme Court directed the central government to constitute a permanent statutory body to examine the complaints of underinclusion, overinclusion or non-inclusion of any class of citizens in the list of backward classes. Accordingly, the National Commission for Backward Classes (NCBC) was set up in 1993 . Later, the 102nd Amendment Act of 2018 conferred a constitutional status on the Commission. For this purpose, the amendment inserted a new Article 338-B in the constitution. Hence, the Commission ceased to be a statutory body and became a constitutional body.
Further, the scope of functions assigned to the Commission is also enlarged under the new dispensation. This was done in order to safeguard the interests of the socially and educationally backward classes more effectively. In other words, the constitutional status of the new Commission is at par with the National Commission for Scheduled Castes (NCSC) and the National Commission for Scheduled Tribes (NCST). The Commission consists of a chairperson, a vice-chairperson and three other members. They are appointed by the President by warrant under his hand and seal. Their conditions of service and tenure of office are also determined by the President.

Functions of the National Commission for OBCs:
The functions of the National Commission for OBCs are the following:
(a) To investigate and monitor all matters relating to the constitutional and other legal safeguards for the socially and educationally backward classes and to evaluate their working.
(b) To inquire into specific complaints with respect to the deprivation of rights and safeguards of the socially and educationally backward classes.
(c) To participate and advise on the socioeconomic development of the socially and educationally backward classes and to evaluate the progress of their development under the Union or a state.
(d) To present to the President, annually and at such other times as it may deem fit, reports upon the working of those safeguards.
(e) To make recommendations as to the measures that should be taken by the Union or a state for the effective implementation of those safeguards and other measures for the protection, welfare and socio-economic development of the socially and educationally backward classes.
(f) To discharge such other functions in relation to the protection, welfare, development and advancement of the socially and educationally backward classes as the President may specify. 

Report of the National Commission for OBCs:
The National Commission for OBCs presents an annual report to the President. It can also submit a report as and when it thinks necessary. The President places all such reports before the Parliament, along with a memorandum explaining the action taken on the recommendations made by the Commission. The memorandum should also contain the reasons for the non-acceptance of any of such recommendations.
The President also forwards any report of the Commission pertaining to a state government to the state government. The government places it before the state legislature, along with a memorandum explaining the action taken on the recommendations of the Commission. The memorandum should also contain the reasons for the non-acceptance of any of such recommendations.

Powers of the National Commission for OBCs:
The National Commission for OBCs is vested with the power to regulate its own procedure. The Commission, while investigating any matter or enquiring into any complaint, has all the powers of a civil court trying a suit and in particular in respect of the following matters:
(a) Summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person from any part of India and examining him on oath
(b) Requiring the discovery and production of any document
(c) Receiving evidence on affidavits
(d) Requisitioning any public record from any court or office
(e) Issuing summons for the examination of witnesses and documents
(f) Any other matter which the President may determine
The central government and the state governments are required to consult the Commission on all major policy matters affecting the socially and educationally backward classes.

Special Officer for Linguistic Minorities
CONSTITUTIONAL PROVISIONS
Originally, the Constitution of India did not make any provision with respect to the Special Officer for Linguistic Minorities. Later, the States Reorganisation Commission (1953–55) made a recommendation in this regard. Accordingly, the Seventh Constitutional Amendment Act of 1956 inserted a new Article 350B in Part XVII of the Constitution. This article contains the following provisions:
1. There should be a Special Officer for Linguistic Minorities. He is to be appointed by the President of India.
2. It would be the duty of the Special Officer to investigate all matters relating to the safeguards provided for linguistic minorities under the Constitution. He would report to the President upon those matters at such intervals as the President may direct. The President should place all such reports before each House of Parliament and send to the governments of the states concerned.
It must be noted here that the Constitution does not specify the qualifications, tenure, salaries and allowances, service conditions and procedure for removal of the Special Officer for Linguistic Minorities.

COMMISSIONER FOR LINGUISTIC MINORITIES:
In pursuance of the provision of Article 350-B of the Constitution, the office of the Special Officer for Linguistic Minorities was created in 1957. He is designated as the Commissioner for Linguistic Minorities.
The Commissioner has his headquarters at Allahabad (Uttar Pradesh). He has three regional offices at Belgaum (Karnataka), Chennai (Tamil Nadu) and Kolkata (West Bengal). Each is headed by an Assistant Commissioner.
The Commissioner is assisted at headquarters by Deputy Commissioner and an Assistant Commissioner. He maintains liaison with the State Governments and Union Territories through nodal officers appointed by them.
At the Central level, the Commissioner falls under the Ministry of Minority Affairs. Hence, he submits the annual reports or other reports to the President through the Union Minority Affairs Minister.

ROLE OF THE COMMISSIONER FOR LINGUISTIC MINORITIES:
The Commissioner takes up all the matters pertaining to the grievances arising out of the non-implementation of the Constitutional and Nationally Agreed Scheme of Safeguards provided to linguistic minorities that come to its notice or are brought to its knowledge by the linguistic minority individuals, groups, associations or organisations at the highest political and administrative levels of the state governments and UT administrations and recommends remedial actions to be taken5 . To promote and preserve linguistic minority groups, the Ministry of Minority Affairs has requested the State Governments / Union Territories to give wide publicity to the constitutional safeguards provided to linguistic minorities and to take necessary administrative measures. The state governments and UT Administrations were urged to accord priority to the implementation of the scheme of safeguards for linguistic minorities. The Commissioner launched a 10 point programme to lend fresh impetus to Governmental efforts towards the preservation of the language and culture of linguistic minorities.

VISION AND MISSION OF COMMISSIONER FOR LINGUISTIC MINORITIES:
The vision and mission of the Commissioner are mentioned here:
Vision:
Streamlining and strengthening implementation machinery and mechanism for effective implementation of the Constitutional safeguards for the Linguistic Minorities, thereby ensuring protection of the rights of speakers of the minority languages so as to provide them equal opportunities for inclusive and integrated development.

Mission:
To ensure that all the states / U.T.s effectively implement the Constitutional safeguards and the nationally agreed scheme of safeguards for the linguistic minorities for providing them equal opportunities for inclusive development.

FUNCTIONS AND OBJECTIVES OF COMMISSIONER FOR LINGUISTIC MINORITIES:
In more detail, the functions and objectives of the Commissioner are as follows:
Functions:
1. To investigate all matters related to safeguards provided to the linguistic minorities
2. To submit to the President of India, the reports on the status  of implementation of the Constitutional and the nationally agreed safeguards for the linguistic minorities
3. To monitor the implementation of safeguards through questionnaires, visits, conferences, seminars, meetings, review mechanism, etc

Objectives Linguistic minorities commission:
1. To provide equal opportunities to the linguistic minorities for inclusive development and national integration
2. To spread awareness amongst the linguistic minorities about the safeguards available to them
3. To ensure effective implementation of the safeguards provided for the linguistic minorities in the Constitution and other safeguards, which are agreed to by the states / U.T.s
4. To handle the representations for redress of grievances related to the safeguards for linguistic minorities

Comptroller and Auditor General of India (CAG):
The Constitution of India (Article 148) provides for an independent office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India (CAG). He is the head of the Indian Audit and Accounts Department. He is the guardian of the public purse and controls the entire financial system of the country at both the levels–the Centre and the state. His duty is to uphold the Constitution of India and laws of Parliament in the field of financial administration. This is the reason why Dr. B.R. Ambedkar said that the CAG shall be the most important Officer under the Constitution of India. He is one of the bulwarks of the democratic system of government in India; the others being the Supreme Court, the Election Commission and the Union Public Service Commission.

APPOINTMENT AND TERM OF AUDITOR GENERAL OF INDIA (CAG):
The CAG is appointed by the president of India by a warrant under his hand and seal. The CAG, before taking over his office, makes and subscribes before the president an oath or affirmation:
1. to bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of India;
2. to uphold the sovereignty and integrity of India;
3. to duly and faithfully and to the best of his ability, knowledge and judgement perform the duties of his office without fear or favour, affection or ill-will; and
4. to uphold the Constitution and the laws.
He holds office for a period of six years or upto the age of 65 years, whichever is earlier. He can resign any time from his office by addressing the resignation letter to the president. He can also be removed by the president on same grounds and in the same manner as a judge of the Supreme Court. In other words, he can be removed by the president on the basis of a resolution passed to that effect by both the Houses of Parliament with special majority, either on the ground of proved misbehaviour or incapacity.

The Constitution has made the following provisions to safeguard and ensure the independence of CAG:
1. He is provided with the security of tenure. He can be removed by the president only in accordance with the procedure mentioned in the Constitution. Thus, he does not hold his office till the pleasure of the president, though he is appointed by him.
2. He is not eligible for further office, either under the Government of India or of any state, after he ceases to hold his office.
3. His salary and other service conditions are determined by the Parliament. His salary is equal to that of a judge of the Supreme Court.
4. Neither his salary nor his rights in respect of leave of absence, pension or age of retirement can be altered to his disadvantage after his appointment.
5. The conditions of service of persons serving in the Indian Audit and Accounts Department and the administrative powers of the CAG are prescribed by the president after consultation with the CAG.
6. The administrative expenses of the office of the CAG, including all salaries, allowances and pensions of persons serving in that office are charged upon the Consolidated Fund of India. Thus, they are not subject to the vote of Parliament. Further, no minister can represent the CAG in Parliament (both Houses) and no minister can be called upon to take any responsibility for any actions done by him.

DUTIES AND POWERS OF AUDITOR GENERAL OF INDIA (CAG):
The Constitution (Article 149) authorises the Parliament to prescribe the duties and powers of the CAG in relation to the accounts of the Union and of the states and of any other authority or body. Accordingly, the Parliament enacted the CAG’s (Duties, Powers and Conditions of Service) act, 1971. This Act was amended in 1976 to separate accounts from audit in the Central government.
The duties and functions of the CAG as laid down by the Parliament and the Constitution are:
1. He audits the accounts related to all expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India, consolidated fund of each state and consolidated fund of each union territory having a Legislative Assembly.
2. He audits all expenditure from the Contingency Fund of India and the Public Account of India as well as the contingency fund of each state and the public account of each state.
3. He audits all trading, manufacturing, profit and loss accounts, balance sheets and other subsidiary accounts kept by any department of the Central Government and state governments.
4. He audits the receipts and expenditure of the Centre and each state to satisfy himself that the rules and procedures in that behalf are designed to secure an effective check on the assessment, collection and proper allocation of revenue.
5. He audits the receipts and expenditure of the following:
(a) All bodies and authorities substantially financed from the Central or state revenues;
(b) Government companies; and
(c) Other corporations and bodies, when so required by related laws.
6. He audits all transactions of the Central and state governments related to debt, sinking funds, deposits, advances, suspense accounts and remittance business. He also audits receipts, stock accounts and others, with approval of the President, or when required by the President.
7. He audits the accounts of any other authority when requested by the President or Governor. For example, the audit of local bodies.
8. He advises the President with regard to prescription of the form in which the accounts of the Centre and the states shall be kept (Article 150).
9. He submits his audit reports relating to the accounts of the Centre to President, who shall, in turn, place them before both the Houses of Parliament (Article 151).
10. He submits his audit reports relating to the accounts of a state to governor, who shall, in turn, place them before the state legislature (Article 151).
11. He ascertains and certifies the net proceeds of any tax or duty (Article 279). His certificate is final. The ‘net proceeds’ means the proceeds of a tax or a duty minus the cost of collection.
12. He acts as a guide, friend and philosopher of the Public Accounts Committee of the Parliament. 
13. He compiles and maintains the accounts of state governments. In 1976, he was relieved of his responsibilities with regard to the compilation and maintenance of accounts of the Central Government due to the separation of accounts from audit, that is, departmentalisation of accounts. 
The CAG submits three audit reports to the President–audit report on appropriation accounts, audit report on finance accounts, and audit report on public undertakings. The President lays these reports before both the Houses of Parliament. After this, the Public Accounts Committee examines them and reports its findings to the Parliament.
The appropriation accounts compare the actual expenditure with the expenditure sanctioned by the Parliament through the Appropriation Act, while the finance accounts show the annual receipts and disbursements of the Union government.

ROLE OF AUDITOR GENERAL OF INDIA (CAG):
The role of CAG is to uphold the Constitution of India and the laws of Parliament in the field of financial administration. The accountability of the executive (i.e., council of ministers) to the Parliament in the sphere of financial administration is secured through audit reports of the CAG. The CAG is an agent of the Parliament and conducts audit of expenditure on behalf of the Parliament. Therefore, he is responsible only to the Parliament. The CAG has more freedom with regard to audit of expenditure than with regard to audit of receipts, stores and stock. “Whereas in relation to expenditure he decides the scope of audit and frames his own audit codes and manuals, he has to proceed with the approval of the executive government in relation to rules for the conduct of the other audits.”

The CAG has ‘to ascertain whether money shown in the accounts as having been disbursed was legally available for and applicable to the service or the purpose to which they have been applied or charged and whether the expenditure conforms to the authority that governs it’. In addition to this legal and regulatory audit, the CAG can also conduct the propriety audit, that is, he can look into the ‘wisdom, faithfulness and economy’ of government expenditure and comment on the wastefulness and extravagance of such expenditure. However, unlike the legal and regulatory audit, which is obligatory on the part of the CAG, the propriety audit is discretionary.

The secret service expenditure is a limitation on the auditing role of the CAG. In this regard, the CAG cannot call for particulars of expenditure incurred by the executive agencies, but has to accept a certificate from the competent administrative authority that the expenditure has been so incurred under his authority. The Constitution of India visualises the CAG to be Comptroller as well as Auditor General. However, in practice, the CAG is fulfilling the role of an Auditor-General only and not that of a Comptroller. In other words, ‘the CAG has no control over the issue of money from the consolidated fund and many departments are authorised to draw money by issuing cheques without specific authority from the CAG, who is concerned only at the audit stage when the expenditure has already taken place’4. In this respect, the CAG of India differs totally from the CAG of Britain who has powers of both Comptroller as well as Auditor General. In other words, in Britain, the executive can draw money from the public exchequer only with the approval of the CAG.

CAG AND CORPORATIONS:
The role of CAG in the auditing of public corporations is limited. Broadly speaking, his relationship with the public corporations falls into the following three categories:
(i) Some corporations are audited totally and directly by the CAG, for example, Damodar Valley Corporation, Oil and Natural Gas Commission, Air India, Indian Airlines Corporation, and others.
(ii) Some other corporations are audited by private professional auditors who are appointed by the Central Government in consultation with the CAG. If necessary, the CAG can conduct supplementary audit. The examples are, Central Warehousing Corporation, Industrial Finance Corporation, and others.
(iii) Some other corporations are totally subjected to private audit.
In other words, their audit is done exclusively by private professional auditors and the CAG does not come into the picture at all. They submit their annual reports and accounts directly to the Parliament. Examples of such corporations are Life Insurance Corporation of India, Reserve Bank of India, State Bank of India, Food Corporation of India, and others. The role of the CAG in the auditing of Government companies is also limited. They are audited by private auditors who are appointed by the Government on the advise of the CAG. The CAG can also undertake supplementary audit or test audit of such companies.
 In 1968, an Audit Board was established as a part of the office of CAG to associate outside specialists and experts to handle the technical aspects of audit of specialised enterprises like engineering, iron and steel, chemicals and so on. This board was established on the recommendations of the Administrative Reforms Commission of India. It consists of a Chairman and two members appointed by the CAG.

APPLEBY’S CRITICISM:
Paul H Appleby, in his two reports on Indian Administration, was very critical of the role of CAG and attacked the significance of his work5. He also suggested that the CAG should be relieved of the responsibility of audit. In other words, he recommended the abolition of the office of CAG. His points of criticism of Indian audit are as follows:
1. The function of the CAG in India, is in a large measure, an inheritance from the colonial rule.
2. The CAG is today a primary cause of widespread and paralysing unwillingness to decide and to act. Auditing has a repressive and negative influence.
3. The Parliament has a greatly exaggerated notion of the importance of auditing to Parliamentary responsibility, and so has failed to define the functions of the CAG as the
Constitution contemplated it would do.
4. The CAG’s function is not really a very important one. Auditors do not know and cannot be expected to know very much about good administration; their prestige is highest with others who do not know much about administration.
5. Auditors know what is auditing, which is not administration; it is a necessary, but a highly pedestrian function with a narrow perspective and a very limited usefulness.
6. A deputy secretary in the department knows more about the problems in his department than the CAG and his entire staff.

Attorney General (AG) of India:
The Constitution (Article 76) has provided for the office of the Attorney General for India1. He is the highest law officer in the country.

APPOINTMENT AND TERM OF ATTORNEY GENERAL OF INDIA:
The Attorney General (AG) is appointed by the president. He must be a person who is qualified to be appointed a judge of the Supreme Court. In other words, he must be a citizen of India and he must have been a judge of some high court for five years or an advocate of some high court for ten years or an eminent jurist, in the opinion of the president.
The term of office of the AG is not fixed by the Constitution. Further, the Constitution does not contain the procedure and grounds for his removal. He holds office during the pleasure of the president. This means that he may be removed by the president at any time. He may also quit his office by submitting his resignation to the president. Conventionally, he resigns when the government (council of ministers) resigns or is replaced, as he is appointed on its advice.
The remuneration of the AG is not fixed by the Constitution. He receives such remuneration as the president may determine.

DUTIES AND FUNCTIONS OF ATTORNEY GENERAL OF INDIA:
As the chief law officer of the Government of India, the duties of the AG include the following:
1. To give advice to the Government of India upon such legal matters, which are referred to him by the president.
2. To perform such other duties of a legal character that are assigned to him by the president.
3. To discharge the functions conferred on him by the Constitution or any other law.
The president has assigned the following duties to the AG2 :
1. To appear on behalf of the Government of India in all cases in the Supreme Court in which the Government of India is concerned.
2. To represent the Government of India in any reference made by the president to the Supreme Court under Article 143 of the Constitution.
3. To appear (when required by the Government of India) in any high court in any case in which the Government of India is concerned.

RIGHTS AND LIMITATIONS OF ATTORNEY GENERAL OF INDIA:
In the performance of his official duties, the Attorney General has the right of audience in all courts in the territory of India. Further, he has the right to speak and to take part in the proceedings of both the Houses of Parliament or their joint sitting and any committee of the Parliament of which he may be named a member, but without a right to vote. He enjoys all the privileges and immunities that are available to a member of Parliament. Following limitations are placed on the Attorney General in order to avoid any complication and conflict of duty:
1. He should not advise or hold a brief against the Government of India.
2. He should not advise or hold a brief in cases in which he is called upon to advise or appear for the Government of India.
3. He should not defend accused persons in criminal prosecutions without the permission of the Government of India.
4. He should not accept appointment as a director in any company or corporation without the permission of the Government of India.
5. He should not advise any ministry or department of Government of India or any statutory organization or any public sector undertaking unless the proposal or a reference in this regard is received through the Ministry of Law and Justice, Department of Legal Affairs.
However, the Attorney General is not a fulltime counsel for the Government. He does not fall in the category of government servants. Further, he is not debarred from private legal practice.

SOLICITOR GENERAL OF INDIA:
In addition to the AG, there are other law officers of the Government of India. They are the solicitor general of India and additional solicitor general of India. They assist the AG in the fulfilment of his official responsibilities. It should be noted here that only the office of the AG is created by the Constitution. In other words, Article 76 does not mention about the solicitor general and additional solicitor general.
The AG is not a member of the Central cabinet. There is a separate law minister in the Central cabinet to look after legal matters at the government level.

Advocate General of the State:
The Constitution (Article 165) has provided for the office of the advocate general for the states. He is the highest law officer in the state. Thus he corresponds to the Attorney General of India.

APPOINTMENT AND TERM OF ADVOCATE GENERAL OF THE STATE:
The advocate general is appointed by the governor. He must be a person who is qualified to be appointed a judge of a high court. In other words, he must be a citizen of India and must have held a judicial office for ten years or been an advocate of a high court for ten years.
The term of office of the advocate general is not fixed by the Constitution. Further, the Constitution does not contain the procedure and grounds for his removal. He holds office during the pleasure of the governor. This means that he may be removed by the governor at any time. He may also quit his office by submitting his resignation to the governor. Conventionally, he resigns when the government (council of ministers) resigns or is replaced, as he is appointed on its advice.
The remuneration of the advocate general is not fixed by the Constitution. He receives such remuneration as the governor may determine.

DUTIES AND FUNCTIONS OF Advocate General of the State:
As the chief law officer of the government in the state, the duties of the advocate general include the following:
1. To give advice to the government of the state upon such legal matters which are referred to him by the governor.
2. To perform such other duties of a legal character that are assigned to him by the governor.
3. To discharge the functions conferred on him by the Constitution or any other law.
In the performance of his official duties, the advocate general is entitled to appear before any court of law within the state. Further, he has the right to speak and to take part in the proceedings of both the Houses of the state legislature or any committee of the state legislature of which he may be named a member, but without a right to vote. He enjoys all the privileges and immunities that are available to a member of the state legislature.

NITI Aayog:

ESTABLISHMENT OF NITI AAYOG:
On the 13th of August, 2014, the Modi Government scrapped the 65year-old Planning Commission and announced that it would be replaced by a new body. Accordingly, on January 1, 2015, the NITI Aayog (National Institution for Transforming India) was established as the successor to the planning commission.
However, it must be noted here that the NITI Aayog, like that of the Planning Commission, was also created by an executive resolution1 of the Government of India (i.e., Union Cabinet). Hence, it is also neither a constitutional body nor a statutory body. In other words, it is a non-constitutional or extra-constitutional body (i.e., not created by the Constitution) and a non-statutory body (not created by an Act of the Parliament).
NITI Aayog is the premier policy ‘Think Tank’ of the Government of India, providing both directional and policy inputs. While designing strategic and long-term policies and programmes for the Government of India, NITI Aayog also provides relevant technical advice to the Centre and States.
The centre-to-state one-way flow of policy, that was the hallmark of the Planning Commission era, is now sought to be replaced by a genuine and continuing partnership of states.
In a paradigmatic shift from the command and control approach of the past, NITI Aayog accommodates diverse points of view in a collaborative, rather than confrontationist, setting. In the spirit of federalism, NITI’s own policy thinking too is shaped by a ‘bottom-up’ approach rather than a ‘top-down’ model.

RATIONALE OF NITI AAYOG:
While explaining the reason for replacing the Planning Commission with the NITI Aayog, the Union Government made the following observation: “India has undergone a paradigm shift over the past six decades–politically, economically, socially, technologically as well as demographically. The role of Government in national development has seen a parallel evolution. Keeping with these changing times, the Government of India has decided to set up NITI Aayog (National Institution for Transforming India), in place of the erstwhile Planning Commission, as a means to better serve the needs and aspirations of the people of India.”
The new institution will be a catalyst to the developmental process; nurturing an overall enabling environment, through a holistic approach to development going beyond the limited sphere of the Public Sector and Government of India. This will be built on the foundations of:
1. An empowered role of States as equal partners in national development; operationalising the principle of Cooperative Federalism.
2. A knowledge hub of internal as well as external resources; serving as a repository of good governance best practices, and a Think Tank offering domain knowledge as well as strategic expertise to all levels of government.
3. A collaborative platform facilitating implementation; by monitoring progress, plugging gaps and bringing together the various ministries at the Centre and in States, in the joint pursuit of developmental goals.
In the same context, the then Union Finance Minister Arun Jaitley said: “The 65-year-old Planning Commission had become a redundant organisation. It was relevant in a command economy structure, but not any longer. India is a diversified country and its states are in various phases of economic development along with their own strengths and weaknesses. In this context, a ‘one-size-fitsall’ approach to economic planning is obsolete. It cannot make India competitive in today’s global economy.” The Resolution observed: “Perhaps most importantly, the institution must adhere to the tenet that while incorporating positive influences from the world, no single model can be transplanted from outside into the Indian scenario. We need to find our own strategy for growth. The new institution has to zero in on what will work in and for India. It will be a Bharatiya approach to development.”

COMPOSITION OF NITI AAYOG:
The composition of the NITI Aayog is as follows:
(a) Chairperson: The Prime Minister of India
(b) Governing Council: It comprises the Chief Ministers of all the States, Chief Ministers of Union Territories with Legislatures (i.e., Delhi, Puducherry and Jammu and Kashmir) and Lt. Governors of other Union Territories.
(c) Regional Councils: These are formed to address specific issues and contingencies impacting more than one state or a region. These are formed for a specified tenure. These are convened by the Prime Minister and comprises of the Chief Ministers of States and Lt. Governors of Union Territories in the region. These are chaired by the Chairperson of the NITI Aayog or his nominee.
(d) Special Invitees: Experts, specialists and practitioners with relevant domain knowledge as special invitees nominated by the Prime Minister.
(e) Full-time Organisational Framework: It comprises, in addition to the Prime Minister as the Chairperson:
(i) Vice-Chairperson: He is appointed by the Prime Minister. He enjoys the rank of a Cabinet Minister.
(ii) Members: Full-time. They enjoy the rank of a Minister of State.
(iii) Part-time Members: Maximum of 2, from leading universities research organisations and other relevant institutions in an ex-officio capacity. Part-time members would be on a rotation.
(iv) Ex-Officio Members: Maximum of 4 members of the Union Council of Ministers to be nominated by the Prime Minister.
(v) Chief Executive Officer: He is appointed by the Prime Minister for a fixed tenure, in the rank of Secretary to the Government India.
(vi) Secretariat: As deemed necessary.

SPECIALISED WINGS OF NITI AAYOG:
NITI Aayog houses a number of specialised wings, including:
1. Research Wing: It develops in-house sectoral expertise as a dedicated think tank of top notch domain experts, specialists and scholars.
2. Consultancy Wing: It provides a marketplace of whetted panels of expertise and funding, for the Central and State Governments to tap into matching their requirements with solution providers, public and private, national and international. By playing match-maker instead of providing the entire service itself, NITI Aayog is able to focus its resources on priority matters, providing guidance and an overall quality check to the rest.
3. Team India Wing: It comprises of the representatives from every State and Ministry and serves as a permanent platform for national collaboration. Each representative:
(a) Ensures that every State/Ministry has a continuous voice and stake in the NITI Aayog.
(b) Establishes a direct communication channel between the State/Ministry and NITI Aayog for all development related matters, as the dedicated liaison interface.
NITI Aayog functions in close cooperation, consultation and coordination with the Ministries of the Central Government, and State Governments. While it makes recommendations to the Central and State Governments, the responsibility for taking and implementing decisions rests with them.

OBJECTIVES OF NITI AAYOG:
The objectives of the NITI Aayog are mentioned below:
1. To evolve a shared vision of national development priorities, sectors and strategies with the active involvement of States.
2. To foster cooperative federalism through structured support initiatives and mechanisms with the States on a continuous basis, recognising that strong States make a strong nation.
3. To develop mechanisms to formulate credible plans at the village level and aggregate these progressively at higher levels of government.
4. To ensure, on areas that are specifically referred to it, that the interests of national security are incorporated in economic strategy and policy.
5. To pay special attention to the sections of our society that may be at risk of not benefitting adequately from economic progress.
6. To design strategic and long-term policy and programme frameworks and initiatives, and monitor their progress and their efficacy. The lessons learnt through monitoring and feedback will be used for making innovative improvements, including necessary midcourse corrections.
7. To provide advice and encourage partnerships between key stakeholders and national and international like-minded think tanks, as well as educational and policy research institutions.
8. To create a knowledge, innovation and entrepreneurial support system through a collaborative community of national and international experts, practitioners and other partners.
9. To offer a platform for resolution of inter-sectoral and interdepartmental issues in order to accelerate the implementation of the development agenda.
10. To maintain a state-of-the-art Resource Centre, be a repository of research on good governance and best practices in sustainable and equitable development as well as help their dissemination to stake-holders.
11. To actively monitor and evaluate the implementation of programmes and initiatives, including the identification of the needed resources so as to strengthen the probability of success and scope of delivery.
12. To focus on technology upgradation and capacity building for implementation of programmes and initiatives.
13. To undertake other activities as may be necessary in order to further the execution of the national development agenda, and the objectives mentioned above.

Through the above, the NITI Aayog aims to accomplish the following objectives and opportunities:
1. An administration paradigm in which the Government is an “enabler” rather than a “provider of first and last resort.”
2. Progress from “food security” to focus on a mix of agricultural production, as well as actual returns that farmers get from their produce.
3. Ensure that India is an active player in the debates and deliberations on the global commons.
4. Ensure that the economically vibrant middle-class remains engaged, and its potential is fully realised.
5. Leverage India’s pool of entrepreneurial, scientific and intellectual human capital.
6. Incorporate the significant geo-economic and geo-political strength of the Non-Resident Indian Community.
7. Use urbanisation as an opportunity to create a wholesome and secure habitat through the use of modern technology.
8. Use technology to reduce opacity and potential for misadventures in governance.

The NITI Aayog aims to enable India to better face complex challenges, through the following:
1. Leveraging of India’s demographic dividend, and realisation of the potential of youth, men and women, through education, skill development, elimination of gender bias, and employment
2. Elimination of poverty, and the chance for every Indian to live a life of dignity and self-respect
3. Redressal of inequalities based on gender bias, caste and economic disparities
4. Integrate villages institutionally into the development process
5. Policy support to more than 50 million small businesses, which are a major source of employment creation
6. Safeguarding our environmental and ecological assets

FUNCTIONS OF NITI AAYOG:
The various functions performed by the NITI Aayog can be divided into four main heads:
1. Design policy and programme framework.
2. Foster co-operative federalism.
3. Monitoring and evaluation.
4. Think-tank, and Knowledge and Innovation Hub.

The NITI Aayog is functionally divided into various Verticals which are responsible for examining and looking into sectoral issues and priorities for national development and economic growth. By dividing the entire gamut of activities in the NITI Aayog, the Team India and Knowledge and Innovation Hubs were constituted, and accordingly Verticals and Core Divisions were created. The two hubs are at the core of NITI’s efficient functioning. The Team India Hub carries out the mandate of fostering ‘Cooperative Federalism’ and ‘Designing Policy and Programme Frameworks’. It provides requisite coordination and support framework to NITI Aayog in its engagement with the States. On the other hand, the Knowledge & Innovation Hub ensures fulfilling the mandate of maintaining a Stateof-the-Art Resource Centre; to be a repository of research of good governance and best practices and their dissemination to stakeholders; and to provide advice and encourage partnerships across key areas.
The NITI Aayog uniquely focus thematic policy interventions which encourages convergence across central ministries, state governments, development partners, sector experts and professionals. This convergence approach to governance is applied to achieve the objectives of NITI Aayog.
The different Verticals of NITI Aayog provide the requisite coordination and support framework for NITI Aayog to carry out its mandate. The list of Verticals is as follows:
1. Agriculture
2. Data Management & Analysis
3. Energy
4. Financial Resources
5. Governance & Research
6. Governing Council Secretariat
7. Health
8. Human Resource Development
9. Industry
10. Infrastructure Connectivity
11. Land & Water Resources
12. Managing Urbanisation
13. Natural Resources & Environment
14. NGO Darpan
15. Project Appraisal & Management Division (PAMD)
16. Public-Private Partnerships
17. Rural Development
18. Science & Technology
19. Skill Development & Employment
20. Social Justice & Empowerment
21. State Coordination and Decentralized Planning
22. Sustainable Development Goals
23. Voluntary Action Cell
24. Women & Child Development

GUIDING PRINCIPLES OF NITI AAYOG:
In carrying out the above functions, the NITI Aayog is guided by the following principles:
1. Antyodaya: Prioritise service and uplift of the poor, marginalised and downtrodden, as enunciated in Pandit Deendayal Upadhyay’s idea of ‘Antyodaya’.
2. Inclusion: Empower vulnerable and marginalised sections, redressing identitybased inequalities of all kinds–gender, region, religion, caste or class.
3. Village: Integrate our villages into the development process, to draw on the vitality and energy of the bedrock of our ethos, culture and sustenance.
4. Demographic dividend: Harness our greatest asset, the people of India; by focussing on their development, through education and skilling, and their empowerment, through productive livelihood opportunities.
5. People’s Participation: Transform the developmental process into a people-driven one, making an awakened and participative citizenry–the driver of good governance.
6. Governance: Nurture an open, transparent, accountable, proactive and purposeful style of governance, transitioning focus from Outlay to Output to Outcome.
7. Sustainability: Maintain sustainability at the core of our planning and developmental process, building on our ancient tradition of respect for the environment. 
Therefore, the NITI Aayog is based on the following seven pillars of effective governance:
(i) Pro-people agenda that fulfils the aspirations of the society as well as individuals.
(ii) Pro-active in anticipating and responding to citizen needs.
(iii) Participative, by involvement of citizens.
(iv) Empowering women in all aspects.
(v) Inclusion of all groups with special attention to the SCs, STs, OBCs and minorities.
(vi) Equality of opportunity for the youth.
(vii) Transparency through the use of technology to make government visible and responsive.

Through its commitment to a cooperative federalism, promotion of citizen engagement, egalitarian access to opportunity, participative and adaptive governance and increasing use of technology, the NITI Aayog seeks to provide a critical directional and strategic input into the development process. This, along with being the incubator of ideas for development, is the core mission of NITI Aayog.

COOPERATIVE FEDERALISM:
The NITI Aayog has been constituted to actualize the important goal of cooperative federalism and to enable good governance in India, to build strong states that will make a strong nation. In a truly federal state, several objectives that ought to be achieved may carry political ramifications throughout the country. It is impossible for any federal government to achieve the national objectives without active cooperation from state governments. It is, therefore, crucial that the Centre and State governments work together as equals.
The two key features or aspects of Cooperative Federalism are:
(i) Joint focus on the National Development Agenda by the Centre and the States; and
(ii) Advocacy of State perspectives with Central Ministries.

In keeping with this, the NITI Aayog has been mandated the task of evolving a shared vision of national development priorities, sectors and strategies with the active involvement of States. These priorities ought to reflect the national objectives and foster cooperative federalism through structured support to States on a continuous basis. The NITI Aayog ought also to help states develop mechanisms to formulate credible plans at the village level and aggregate these progressively at higher levels of government. The aim is to progress from a stage when the Centre decided development policies to a truly federal government wherein States are equal stakeholders in the planning process.
The policy of the Government to involve State governments is reflected in changes in the interaction processes of the NITI Aayog. Consistent with its mandate, the NITI Aayog has undertaken several crucial initiatives to ensure that States are equal partners in the policy making and implementing process.

At the meetings of the Governing Council of NITI Aayog, the Prime Minister highlighted the importance of NITI Aayog as a platform to inspite cooperative federalism, stressing on the need for effective center-state cooperation to advance development outcomes and achieve double-digit and inclusive growth for India. It is the constant endeavor of NITI Aayog to evolve a shared vision of national priorities, sectors, and strategies with the active involvement of States, wherein States are equal stakeholders in the planning process as well. In keeping with this, the Vice-Chairman of NITI Aayog committed himself to visit all States, to develop and offer a platform for resolution of inter-sectoral and inter-departmental issues in order to accelerate the implementation of the development agenda.

The NITI Aayog has also established models and programmes for development of infrastructure and to reignite and establish PrivatePublic Partnership, such as the Centre-State partnership model: Development Support Services to States (DSSS); and the Sustainable Action For Transforming Human Capital (SATH) programme which is designed to help States improve their social sector indicators by providing them technical support. Further, with the aim of correcting regional development imbalance, the NITI Aayog has taken special steps for regions needing special attention and support, like the North Eastern States, Island States and hilly Himayalan States by constituting special forums to identify their specific constraints, formulating special policies to ensure sustainable development takes place in these regions while also protecting their abundant natural resources. From the above discussion, we can summarise the various manifestions of Cooperative Federalism in the working of the NITI Aayog:
1. Meetings of Governing Council
2. Sub-groups of Chief Ministers on different subjects
3. Task Forces on specific subjects
4. NITI Forum for North East
5. Sustainable Development in the Indian Himayalan Region
6. Development Support Services to States
7. Sustainable Action For Transforming Human Capital (SATH)

CRITICISM OF NITI AAYOG:
Hitting out at the government for its decision to restructure the Planning Commission and rechristen it as “NITI Aayog”, the Opposition said the move is just a “fluff” and mere “gimmickry”. They also expressed their apprehension that the new body will pave the way for discrimination, as “corporates will call the shots” in policymaking in the country. CPI(M) leader Sitaram Yechury termed the renaming of the Planning Commission as aniti aur durniti (no policy and bad policy). Mr. Yechury said, “just a change of nomenclature and gimmickry does not serve any purpose. Let us see what the government plans to do with it”.
“If the government wants to greet people with fluff and not substance on the first day of 2015, then there is nothing more that can be said... If the North Block or the Finance Ministry has a very short-term view of both fiscal and monetary objective and is going to be the final arbiter between the states and the Centre... it being the stakeholder in the process... I am afraid, is going to discriminate against the states,” Congress leader Manish Tewari said. “After all, what was the Planning Commission doing? It used to plan policy. So by changing the nomenclature from Planning Commission to NITI Aayog what is the message this government is trying to send,” Mr. Tewari said, adding that Congress’ opposition to restructuring of the Planning Commission was based on “principles”. “It’s not a question of fighting a war, it’s a matter of principle. The Opposition Bharatiya Janata Party used to go extra lengths talking about federalism and how the sanctity and sacrosanct of federalism has to be maintained. And now they are going exactly the reverse,” the Congress leader said.

Veteran CPI leader Gurudas Dasgupta said that dismantling of the Planning Commission and bringing in a new body in its place will lead to an unregulated economy. “It is not a change of name. The Planning Commission is being abolished because they (government) don’t believe in planning,” he said.
“The government would like to have a fullmarket economy (which is) totally unregulated,” Mr. Dasgupta said adding. “If this becomes the policy of the government to not help advance the country, control inflation and create job opportunities, it will not be good for the country”.
“Mere change of name from Yojana Aayog to NITI is not objectionable if it is coupled with real reform. Otherwise, it will be purely cosmetic like earlier naming ceremonies,” Congress spokesperson Abhishek Manu Singhvi said. He said the Congress would have supported constructive reform of the Planning Commission. But the “alteration of identity and basic structure”, he said, “is being done because of anti-Nehruvianism and antiCongression.”
CPI(M) central committee member Md Selim, MP, said no meaningful purpose would be served by just renaming the Planning Commission. Alleging that the BJP government had decided to dissolve the planning commission “to dilute the planning process”, he said the government should have given more teeth to the National Development Council instead.

ATTACHED OFFICES TO NITI AAYOG:
There are two offices attached to the NITI Aayog. They are explained below:
1. National Institute of Labour Economics Research and Development
The National Institute of Labour Economics Research and Development (NILERD) was formerly known as the Institute of Applied Manpower Research (IAMR). It is a central autonomous organization attached to the NITI Aayog. Its primary objectives are research, data collection, education and training in all aspects of human capital planning, human resource development, and monitoring and evaluation.
The IAMR was established in 1962 under the Societies Registration Act of 1860 as an institution that would function as a clearinghouse of ideas and undertake policy research on human capital development to inform perspective planning and promote policy integration. The main object of the Institute is to advance knowledge about the nature, characteristics and utilisation of human resources through research, education and training, consultancy, etc.
The IAMR has been renamed as NILERD in 2014. The NILERD is mainly funded by grants-in-aid from the NITI Aayog (formerly Planning Commission), and supplemented by its own revenue from contracted research projects, and education and training activities. The prime objective of NILERD has been to develop an institutional framework capable of sustaining and steering a systematic applied human resource planning research process.
Since its inception, the Institute has carved out its own trajectory to achieve academic heights, and in the process, developed a range of academic activities not only in the field of human resource planning and development, but also in monitoring and evaluation of public policies and programmes. During the past few years, the Institute has exhibited remarkable dynamism in addressing the issues of national priorities. The Institute has emerged as a pioneering institute in providing academic training on human resource planning and development for both international and national participants.
The Institute moved to its own campus at Narela in 2002. Narela is a developing urban and institutional hub declared as a special economic zone for knowledge in the National Capital Region.

2. Development Monitoring and Evaluation Office:
The need for an efficient and independent evaluation mechanism in India was recognized by the planners and policy-makers right from the introduction of planning process in the country and resultantly, the Programme Evaluation Organization was established by the Government in 1952 to carry out independent and objective impact evaluation of the Central Government funded programmes. The Development Monitoring and Evaluation Office (DMEO) was established by the Government in 2015 as an attached office of the NITI Aayog by merging the erstwhile Programme Evaluation Organization and the Independent Evaluation Office. The DMEO is headed by the Director General who is equivalent to an Additional Secretary to the Government of India. To ensure that DMEO is able to function independently and effectively, it has been provided with separate budgetary allocations and manpower in addition to complete functional autonomy.
The DMEO has been mandated to actively monitor and evaluate the implementation of the programmes and initiatives of the Government of India, including the identification of the needed resources so as to strengthen the probability of the success and scope of delivery.
The functions of DMEO are:
1. Monitor the implementation of Government programmes
2. Help Ministries in designing TORs for evaluation studies
3. Monitor the implementation and progress of SDGs
4. Promote the spirit of Cooperative Federalism
5. Conduct evaluation of the Government programmes

At the NITI Aayog level, the programme evaluation work is being looked after under the overall guidance of the Vice-Chairman, NITI Aayog. In addition to the Director General, the DMEO has been provided with 4 Deputy Director Generals (SAG level) to look after the functional mandate in addition to the Joint Secretary (Adm. & Fin.) who is to provide administrative and logistics support. The Headquarter of DMEO is in NITI Aayog, New Delhi. The DMEO had 15 Regional Offices known as Regional Development Monitoring and Evaluation Offices (RDMEOs). Each RDMEO was headed by a Director level officer. The RDMEOs conducted field surveys and data/ information collection work for evaluation studies, and they also played an important role in promoting cooperative federalism by their interaction with the States and UT administrations. However, keeping in view the changed functional requirements, they were closed in 2017 and the staff were transferred to DMEO Hqrs in New Delhi.

ERSTWHILE PLANNING COMMISSION:
The erstwhile Planning Commission was established in March 1950 by an executive resolution of the Government of India, (i.e., the Union Cabinet) on the recommendation of the Advisory Planning Board constituted in 1946, under the chairmanship of K.C. Neogi. Thus, the erstwhile Planning Commission was neither a constitutional body nor a statutory body. In India, it was the supreme organ of planning for social and economic development.

The functions of the erstwhile Planning Commission included the following:
1. To make an assessment of material, capital and human resources of the country, and investigate the possibilities of augmenting them.
2. To formulate a plan for the most effective and balanced utilisation of the country’s resources.
3. To determine priorities and to define the stages in which the plan should be carried out.
4. To indicate the factors that retard economic development.
5. To determine the nature of the machinery required for successful implementation of the plan in each stage.
6. To appraise, from time to time, the progress achieved in execution of the plan and to recommend necessary adjustments.
7. To make appropriate recommendations for facilitating the discharge of its duties, or on a matter referred to it for advice by Central or state governments.
The Allocation of Business Rules had assigned the following matters (in addition to the above) to the erstwhile Planning Commission:
1. Public Co-operation in National Development
2. Specific programmes for area development notified from time to time
3. Perspective Planning
4. Institute of Applied Manpower Research
5. Unique Identification Authority of India (UIDAI)
6. All matters relating to National Rainfed Area Authority (NRAA) 

Earlier, the National Informatics Centre was also under the erstwhile Planning Commission. Later, it was brought under the Ministry of Information Technology. It should be noted that the erstwhile Planning Commission was only a staff agency–an advisory body and had no executive responsibility. It was not responsible for taking and implementing decisions. This responsibility rested with the Central and State Governments.

The following points can be noted in context of the composition (membership) of the erstwhile Planning Commission:
1. The Prime Minister of India was the chairman of the commission. He presided over the meetings of the commission.
2. The commission had a deputy chairman. He was the de facto executive head (i.e., full-time functional head) of the commission. He was responsible for the formulation and submission of the draft of Five-Year Plan to the Central cabinet. He was appointed by the Central cabinet for a fixed tenure and enjoyed the rank of a Cabinet Minister. Though he was not a member of cabinet, he was invited to attend all its meetings (without a right to vote).
3. Some Central Ministers were appointed as part-time members of the commission. In any case, the finance minister and planning minister were the exofficio (by virtue of) members of the commission.
4. The commission had four to seven fulltime expert members. They enjoyed the rank of a minister of state.
5. The commission had a member-secretary. He was usually a senior member of IAS. The state governments were not represented in the commission in any way. Thus, the erstwhile Planning Commission was wholly a Centre-constituted body. 

The erstwhile Planning Commission was originally established as a staff agency with advisory role but in the course of time it had emerged as a powerful and directive authority whereby its recommendations were considered both by the Union and states. The critics had described it as a ‘Super Cabinet’, an ‘Economic Cabinet’, a ‘Parallel Cabinet’, the ‘Fifth Wheel of the Coach’ and so on.
The following observations were made on the domineering role played by the erstwhile Planning Commission.
1. Administrative Reforms Commission (ARC) of India: The ARC observed: ‘Under the Constitution, the ministers, whether in the Centre or the states, are in effect, the ultimate executive authorities. Unfortunately, the Planning Commission has, in some measures, earned the reputation of being a Parallel Cabinet and sometimes, a Super Cabinet’.
2. K. Santhanam This eminent constitutional expert stated that, ‘Planning has superseded the federation and our country is functioning like a unitary system in many respects.
3. P.V. Rajamannar Rajamannar, the Chairman of the Fourth Finance Commission, highlighted the overlapping of functions and responsibilities between the erstwhile Planning Commission and Finance Commission in federal fiscal transfers.

NATIONAL DEVELOPMENT COUNCIL (NDC):
On the 1st of January, 2016, it was reported15 that the Modi government is also going to abolish the National Development Council (NDC) and transfer its powers to the Governing Council of the NITI Aayog. However, till now (October 2019), such a resolution has not been passed.
It must also be noted here that the last meeting (57th) of the NDC was held on the 27th of December, 2012 to approve the 12th Plan (2012–2017).
The National Development Council (NDC) was established in August 1952 by an executive resolution of the Government of India on the recommendation of the First Five Year Plan (draft outline). Like the erstwhile Planning Commission, it is neither a constitutional body nor a statutory body.

COMPOSITION OF NATIONAL DEVELOPMENT COUNCIL (NDC):
The NDC is composed of the following members:
1. The Prime Minister of India (as its chairman/head).
2. All Union Cabinet Ministers (since 1967).
3. The Chief Ministers of all the states.
4. The Chief Ministers/administrators of all union territories.
5. Members of the Planning Commission (now NITI Aayog).
The secretary of the Planning Commission (now NITI Aayog) acts as the secretary to the NDC. It (NDC) is also provided with administrative and other assistance for its work by the Planning Commission (now NITI Aayog).

OBJECTIVES OF NATIONAL DEVELOPMENT COUNCIL (NDC):
The NDC was established with the following objectives.
1. To secure cooperation of states in the execution of the Plan.
2. To strengthen and mobilise the efforts and resources of the nation in support of the Plan.
3. To promote common economic policies in all vital spheres.
4. To ensure balanced and rapid development of all parts of the country. 

FUNCTION OF NATIONAL DEVELOPMENT COUNCIL (NDC):
To realise the above objectives, the NDC is assigned with the following functions:
1. To prescribe guidelines for preparation of the national Plan.
2. To consider the national Plan as prepared by the Planning Commission (now NITI Aayog).
3. To make an assessment of the resources required for implementing the Plan and to suggest measures for augmenting them.
4. To consider important questions of social and economic policy affecting national development.
5. To review the working of the national Plan from time to time.
6. To recommend measures for achievement of the aims and targets set out in the national Plan.

The Draft Five-Year Plan prepared by the Planning Commission (now NITI Aayog) is first submitted to the Union Cabinet. After its approval, it is placed before the NDC, for its acceptance. Then, the Plan is presented to the Parliament. With its approval, it emerges as the official Plan and published in the official gazette.
Therefore, the NDC is the highest body, below the Parliament, responsible for policy matters with regard to planning for social and economic development. However, it is listed as an advisory body to the Planning Commission (now NITI Aayog) and its recommendations are not binding. It makes its recommendations to the Central and state governments and should meet at least twice every year.
Critical Evaluation The first and foremost function of NDC is to act as a bridge and link between the Central Government, the State Governments and the Planning Commission (now NITI Aayog) especially in the field of planning, to bring about coordination of policies and programmes of plans. It has been, to a large extent successful in this regard. Besides, it has also served as a forum for Centre-State deliberations on matters of national importance, and also as a device for sharing responsibility between them in the federal political system.
However, two diametrically opposite views have been expressed on its working. On one hand, it has been described as a ‘Super Cabinet’ due to its wide and powerful composition, though its recommendations are only advisory and not binding, and can hardly be ignored as they are backed by a national mandate. On the other hand, it has been described as a mere ‘rubber stamp’ of the policy decisions already taken by the Union government. This is mainly due to the Congress Party rule both at the Centre and states for a long period. However, due to the emergence of regional parties in various states, the NDC is steadily acquiring its federal character and thus providing a greater say to the states in the preparation of national plans.


NATIONAL HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSION:

ESTABLISHMENT OF THE NATIONAL HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSION:
The National Human Rights Commission is a statutory (and not a constitutional) body. It was established in 1993 under a legislation enacted by the Parliament, namely, the Protection of Human Rights Act, 1993.
The National Human Rights commission is the watchdog of human rights in the country, that is, the rights relating to life, liberty, equality and dignity of the individual guaranteed by the Constitution or embodied in the international covenants and enforceable by courts in India. The specific objectives of the establishment of the commission are:
(a) To strengthen the institutional arrangements through which human rights issues could be addressed in their entirety in a more focussed manner;
(b) To look into allegations of excesses, independently of the government, in a manner that would underline the government’s commitment to protect human rights; and
(c) To complement and strengthen the efforts that have already been made in this direction.

COMPOSITION OF THE NATIONAL HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSION:
The commission is a multi-member body consisting of a chairperson and five members. The chairperson should be a retired chief justice of India or a judge of the Supreme Court and members should be a serving or retired judge of the Supreme Court, a serving or retired chief justice of a high court and three persons (out of which atleast one should be a woman) having knowledge or practical experience with respect to human rights. In addition to these full-time members, the commission also has seven ex-officio members–the chairpersons of the National Commission for Minorities, the National Commission for SCs, the National Commission for STs, the National Commission for Women, the National Commission for BCs and the National Commission for Protection of Child Rights and the Chief Commissioner for Persons with Disabilities.
The chairperson and members are appointed by the president on the recommendations of a six-member committee consisting of the prime minister as its head, the Speaker of the Lok Sabha, the Deputy Chairman of the Rajya Sabha, leaders of the Opposition in both the Houses of Parliament and the Central home minister. Further, a sitting judge of the Supreme Court or a sitting chief justice of a high court can be appointed only after consultation with the chief justice of India.
The chairperson and members hold office for a term of three years or until they attain the age of 70 years, whichever is earlier. They are elligible for re-appointment. After their tenure, the chairperson and members are not eligible for further employment under the Central or a state government.
The president can remove the chairperson or any member from the office under the following circumstances:
(a) If he is adjudged an insolvent; or
(b) If he engages, during his term of office, in any paid employment outside the duties of his office; or
(c) If he is unfit to continue in office by reason of infirmity of mind or body; or
(d) If he is of unsound mind and stand so declared by a competent court; or
(e) If he is convicted and sentenced to imprisonment for an offence.
In addition to these, the president can also remove the chairperson or any member on the ground of proved misbehaviour or incapacity. However, in these cases, the president has to refer the matter to the Supreme Court for an inquiry. If the Supreme Court, after the inquiry, upholds the cause of removal and advises so, then the president can remove the chairperson or a member. The salaries, allowances and other conditions of service of the chairperson or a member are determined by the Central government. But, they cannot be varied to his disadvantage after his appointment.
All the above provisions are aimed at securing autonomy, independence and impartiality in the functioning of the Commission.

FUNCTIONS OF THE NATIONAL HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSION:
The functions of the National Human Rights Commission are:
(a) To inquire into any violation of human rights or negligence in the prevention of such violation by a public servant, either suo motu or on a petition presented to it or on an order of a court.
(b) To intervene in any proceeding involving allegation of violation of human rights pending before a court. 
(c) To visit jails and detention places to study the living conditions of inmates and make recommendation thereon.
(d) To review the constitutional and other legal safeguards for the protection of human rights and recommend measures for their effective implementation.
(e) To review the factors including acts of terrorism that inhibit the enjoyment of human rights and recommend remedial measures.
(f) To study treaties and other international instruments on human rights and make recommendations for their effective implementation.
(g) To undertake and promote research in the field of human rights.
(h) To spread human rights literacy among the people and promote awareness of the safeguards available for the protection of these rights.
(i) To encourage the efforts of nongovernmental organisations (NGOs) working in the field of human rights.
(j) To undertake such other functions as it may consider necessary for the promotion of human rights.

WORKING OF THE NATIONAL HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSION:
The commission’s headquarters is at Delhi and it can also establish offices at other places in India. It is vested with the power to regulate its own procedure. It has all the powers of a civil court and its proceedings have a judicial character. It may call for information or report from the Central and state governments or any other authority subordinate thereto.
The commission has its own nucleus of investigating staff for investigation into complaints of human rights violations. Besides, it is empowered to utilise the services of any officer or investigation agency of the Central government or any state government for the purpose. It has also established effective cooperation with the NGOs with first-hand information about human rights violations. The commission is not empowered to inquire into any matter after the expiry of one year from the date on which the act constituting violation of human rights is alleged to have been committed. In other words, it can look into a matter within one year of its occurrence.
The commission may take any of the following steps during or upon the completion of an inquiry:
(a) it may recommend to the concerned government or authority to make payment of compensation or damages to the victim;
(b) it may recommend to the concerned government or authority the initiation of proceedings for prosecution or any other action against the guilty public servant;
(c) it may recommend to the concerned government or authority for the grant of immediate interim relief to the victim;
(d) it may approach the Supreme Court or the high court concerned for the necessary directions, orders or writs.

ROLE OF THE NATIONAL HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSION:
From the above, it is clear that the functions of the commission are mainly recommendatory in nature. It has no power to punish the violators of human rights, nor to award any relief including monetary relief to the victim. Notably, its recommendations are not binding on the concerned government or authority. But, it should be informed about the action taken on its recommendations within one month. In this context, a former member of the Commission observed: ‘The government cannot wash away the recommendations made by the Commission. The commission’s role may be recommendatory, advisory, yet the Government considers the cases forwarded by it. It is, therefore, improper to say that the commission is powerless. It enjoys great material authority and no government can ignore its recommendation’. Moreover, the commission has limited role, powers and jurisdiction with respect to the violation of human rights by the members of the armed force. In this sphere, the commission may seek a report from the Central government and make its recommendations. The Central government should inform the Commission of the action taken on the recommendations within three months.
The commission submits its annual or special reports to the Central government and to the state government concerned. These reports are laid before the respective legislatures, along with a memorandum of action taken on the recommendations of the commission and the reasons for non-acceptance of any of such recommendations.

PERFORMANCE OF THE NATIONAL HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSION:
The various human rights issues taken up by the Commission are as follows:
1. Abolition of Bonded Labour
2. Functioning of the Mental Hospitals at Ranchi, Agra and Gwalior
3. Functioning of the Government Protective Home (Women), Agra
4. Issues Concerning Right to Food
5. Review of the Child Marriage Restraint Act, 1929
6. Protocols to the Convention on the Rights of the Child
7. Preventing Employment of Children by Government Servants: Amendment of Service Rules
8. Abolition of Child Labour
9. Guidebook for the Media on Sexual Violence against Children
10. Trafficking in Women and Children: Manual for the Judiciary for Gender Sensitisation
11. Sensitisation Programme on Prevention of Sex Tourism and Trafficking
12. Maternal Anemia and Human Rights
13. Rehabilitation of Destitute Women in Vrindavan
14. Combating Sexual Harassment of Women at the Work Place
15. Harassment of Women Passengers in Trains
16. Abolition of Manual Scavenging
17. Dalits Issues including Atrocities Perpetrated on them
18. Problems Faced by Denotified and Nomadic Tribes
19. Rights of the Disabled Persons
20. Issues Related to Right to Health
21. Rights of Persons Affected by HIV / AIDS
22. Relief Work for the Victims of 1999 Orissa Cyclone
23. Monitoring of Relief Measures undertaken after Gujarat Earthquake (2001)
24. District Complaints Authority
25. Population Policy - Development and Human Rights
26. Review of Statutes, including Terrorist & Disruptive Activities Act, and (Draft) Prevention of Terrorism Bill, 2000
27. Protection of Human Rights in Areas of Insurgency and Terrorism
28. Guidelines to Check Misuse of the Power of Arrest by the Police
29. Setting up of Human Rights Cells in the State / City Police Headquarters
30. Steps to Check Custodial Deaths, Rape and Torture
31. Accession to the Convention against Torture, Additional Protocols to the Geneva Conventions.
32. Discussion on Adoption of a Refugee Law for the Country
33. Systemic Reforms of Police, Prisons and other Centers of Detention
34. Review of Laws, Implementation of Treaties, and the International Instruments on Human Rights
35. Promotion of Human Rights Literacy and Awareness in the Educational System
36. Human Rights Training for the Armed Forces and Police, Public Authorities and Civil Society
37. Action Research on Trafficking.
38. Research through well-known academic institutions and NGOs on various issues relating to human rights.
39. Constitution with NGOs and experts / specialists on human rights issues.

STATE HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSION:
The Protection of Human Rights Act of 1993 provides for the creation of not only the National Human Rights Commission but also a State Human Rights Commission at the state level. Accordingly, twenty six states have constituted the State Human Rights Commissions through Official Gazette Notifications.
A State Human Rights Commission can inquire into violation of human rights only in respect of subjects mentioned in the State List (List-II) and the Concurrent List (List-III) of the Seventh Schedule of the Constitution. However, if any such case is already being inquired into by the National Human Rights Commission or any other Statutory Commission, then the State Human Rights Commission does not inquire into that case.
The central government may confer upon the State Human Rights Commissions the functions relating to human rights being discharged by the union territories, except the union territory of Delhi. The functions relating to human rights in case of union territory of Delhi are to be dealt with by the National Human Rights Commission.

COMPOSITION OF THE STATE HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSION:
The State Human Rights Commission is a multi-member body consisting of a chairperson and two members3. The chairperson should be a retired Chief Justice or a Judge of a High Court and members should be a serving or retired judge of a High Court or a District Judge in the state with a minimum of seven years experience as District Judge and a person having knowledge or practical experience with respect to human rights.
The chairperson and members are appointed by the Governor on the recommendations of a committee consisting of the chief minister as its head, the speaker of the Legislative Assembly, the state home minister and the leader of the opposition in the Legislative Assembly. In the case of a state having Legislative Council, the chairman of the Council and the leader of the opposition in the Council would also be the members of the committee. Further, a sitting judge of a High Court or a sitting District Judge can be appointed only after consultation with the Chief Justice of the High Court of the concerned state.
The chairperson and members hold office for a term of three years or until they attain the age of 70 years, whichever is earlier. They are elligible for re-appointment. After their tenure, the chairperson and members are not eligible for further employment under a state government or the Central government. Although the chairperson and members of a State Human Rights Commission are appointed by the governor, they can be removed only by the President (and not by the governor). The President can remove them on the same grounds and in the same manner as he can remove the chairperson or a member of the National Human Rights Commission. Thus, he can remove the chairperson or a member under the following circumstances:
(a) If he is adjudged an insolvent; or
(b) If he engages, during his term of office, in any paid employment outside the duties of his office; or
(c) If he is unfit to continue in office by reason of infirmity of mind or body; or
(d) If he is of unsound mind and stands so declared by a competent court; or
(e) If he is convicted and sentenced to imprisonment for an offence.
In addition to these, the president can also remove the chairperson or a member on the ground of proved misbehaviour or incapacity. However, in these cases, the President has to refer the matter to the Supreme Court for an inquiry. If the Supreme Court, after the inquiry, upholds the cause of removal and advises so, then the President can remove the chairperson or a member. The salaries, allowances and other conditions of service of the chairperson or a member are determined by the state government. But, they cannot be varied to his disadvantage after his appointment.
All the above provisions are aimed at securing autonomy, independence and impartiality in the functioning of the Commission.

FUNCTIONS OF THE STATE HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSION:
The functions of the Commission are:
(a) To inquire into any violation of human rights or negligence in the prevention of such violation by a public servant, either suo motu or on a petition presented to it or on an order of a court.
(b) To intervene in any proceeding involving allegation of violation of human rights pending before a court.
(c) To visit jails and detention places to study the living conditions of inmates and make recommendation thereon.
(d) To review the constitutional and other legal safeguards for the protection of human rights and recommend measures for their effective implementation.
(e) To review the factors including acts of terrorism that inhibit the enjoyment of human rights and recommend remedial measures.
(f) To undertake and promote research in the field of human rights.
(g) To spread human rights literacy among the people and promote awareness of the safeguards available for the protection of these rights.
(h) To encourage the efforts of non-governmental organizations (NGOs) working in the field of human rights.
(i) To undertake such other functions as it may consider necessary for the promotion of human rights.

WORKING OF THE STATE HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSION:
The Commission is vested with the power to regulate its own procedure. It has all the powers of a civil court and its proceedings have a judicial character. It may call for information or report from the state government or any other authority subordinate thereto. The Commission is not empowered to inquire into any matter after the expiry of one year from the date on which the act constituting violation of human rights is alleged to have been committed. In other words, it can look into a matter within one year of its occurrence.
The Commission may take any of the following steps during or upon the completion of an inquiry:
(a) it may recommend to the state government or authority to make payment of compensation or damages to the victim;
(b) it may recommend to the state government or authority the initiation of proceedings for prosecution or any other action against the guilty public servant;
(c) it may recommend to the state government or authority for the grant of immediate interim relief to the victim;
(d) it may approach the Supreme Court or the state high court for the necessary directions, orders or writs.
From the above, it is clear that the functions of the commission are mainly recommendatory in nature. It has no power to punish the violators of human rights, nor to award any relief including monetary relief to the victim. Notably, its recommendations are not binding on the state government or authority. But, it should be informed about the action taken on its recommendations within one month.
The Commission submits its annual or special reports to the state government. These reports are laid before the state legislature, along with a memorandum of action taken on the recommendations of the Commission and the reasons for nonacceptance of any of such recommendations.

HUMAN RIGHTS COURTS:
The Protection of Human Rights Act (1993) also provides for the establishment of Human Rights Court in every district for the speedy trial of violation of human rights.
These courts can be set up by the state government only with the concurrence of the Chief Justice of the High Court of that state.
For every Human Rights Court, the state government specifies a public prosecutor or appoints an advocate (who has practiced for seven years) as a special public prosecutor.

2019 AMENDMENT ACT:
The various provisions or features of the Protection of Human Rights (Amendment) Act, 2019, are as follows:
1. It provided that a person who has been a judge of the Supreme Court is also made eligible to be appointed as Chairperson of the National Human Rights Commission (in addition to the person who has been the Chief Justice of India).
2. It increased the number of members of the National Human Rights Commission (who are to be appointed from amongst persons having knowledge or practical experience with respect to human rights) from two to three out of which at least one has to be a woman.
3. It made the chairpersons of the National Commission for BCs and the National Commission for Protection of Child Rights as well as the Chief Commissioner for Persons with Disabilities as the exofficio members of the National Human Rights Commission.
4. It reduced the term of the chairperson of members of the National Human Rights Commission as well as the State Human Rights Commission from five to three years. It also made them eligible for re-appointment.
5. It provided that a person who has been a judge of a High Court is also made eligible to be appointed as Chairperson of the State Human Rights Commission (in addition to the person who has been the Chief Justice of a High Court).
6. It provided that the central government may confer upon the State Human Rights Commissions the functions relating to human rights being discharged by the union territories, except the union territory of Delhi. The functions relating to human rights in case of union territory of Delhi are to be dealt with by the National Human Rights Commission.
7. It provided that the Secretary-General of the National Human Rights Commission shall exercise all administrative and financial powers (except judicial functions and the power to make regulations), subject to control of the chairperson.
8. It provided that the Secretary of the State Human Rights Commission shall exercise all administrative and financial powers of the Commission, subject to control of the chairperson.

CENTRAL INFORMATION COMMISSION:
The Central Information Commission was established by the Central Government in 2005. It was constituted through an Official Gazette Notification under the provisions of the Right to Information Act (2005). Hence, it is not a constitutional body. The Central Information Commission is a high-powered independent body which inter alia looks into the complaints made to it and decide the appeals. It entertains complaints and appeals pertaining to offices, financial institutions, public sector undertakings, etc., under the Central Government and the Union Territories. 

COMPOSITION OF CENTRAL INFORMATION COMMISSION:
The Commission consists of a Chief Information Commissioner and not more than ten Information Commissioners. The Commission, when constituted initially, had five commissioners including the Chief Information Commissioner. At present (2019), the Commission has six Information Commissioners apart from the Chief Information Commissioner1. They are appointed by the President on the recommendation of a committee consisting of the Prime Minister as Chairperson, the Leader of Opposition in the Lok Sabha and a Union Cabinet Minister nominated by the Prime Minister. They should be persons of eminence in public life with wide knowledge and experience in law, science and technology, social service, management, journalism, mass media or administration and governance. They should not be a Member of Parliament or Member of the Legislature of any State or Union Territory. They should not hold any other office of profit or connected with any political party or carrying on any business or pursuing any profession.

TENURE AND SERVICE CONDITIONS OF CHEIF INFORMATION COMMISSIONER:
The Chief Information Commissioner and an Information Commissioner shall hold office for such term as prescribed by the Central Government or until they attain the age of 65 years, whichever is earlier. They are not eligible for reappointment. The President can remove the Chief Information Commissioner or any Information Commissioner from the office under the following circumstances:
(a) if he is adjudged an insolvent; or
(b) if he has been convicted of an offence which (in the opinion of the President) involves a moral turpitude; or
(c) if he engages during his term of office in any paid employment outside the duties of his office; or
(d) if he is (in the opinion of the President) unfit to continue in office due to infirmity of mind or body; or
(e) if he has acquired such financial or other interest as is likely to affect prejudicially his official functions.
In addition to these, the President can also remove the Chief Information Commissioner or any Information Commissioner on the ground of proved misbehaviour or incapacity. However, in these cases, the President has to refer the matter to the Supreme Court for an enquiry. If the Supreme Court, after the enquiry, upholds the cause of removal and advises so, then the President can remove him.
The salary, allowances and other service conditions of the Chief Information Commissioner and an Information Commissioner shall be such as prescribed by the Central Government. But, they cannot be varied to his disadvantage during service.

POWERS AND FUNCTIONS OF CENTRAL INFORMATION COMMISSION:
The powers and functions of the Central Information Commission are:
1. It is the duty of the Commission to receive and inquire into a complaint from any person:
(a) who has not been able to submit an information request because of non-appointment of a Public Information Officer;
(b) who has been refused information that was requested;
(c) who has not received response to his information request within the specified time limits;
(d) who thinks the fees charged are unreasonable;
(e) who thinks information given is incomplete, misleading or false; and
(f) any other matter relating to obtaining information.
2. The Commission can order inquiry into any matter if there are reasonable grounds (suo-moto power).
3. While inquiring, the Commission has the powers of a civil court in respect of the following matters:
(a) summoning and enforcing attendance of persons and compelling them to give oral or written evidence on oath and to produce documents or things;
(b) requiring the discovery and inspection of documents;
(c) receiving evidence on affidavit;
(d) requisitioning any public record from any court or office;
(e) issuing summons for examination of witnesses or documents; and
(f) any other matter which may be prescribed.
4. During the inquiry of a complaint, the Commission may examine any record which is under the control of the public authority and no such record may be withheld from it on any grounds. In other words, all public records must be given to the Commission during inquiry for examination.
5. The Commission has the power to secure compliance of its decisions from the public authority. This includes:
(a) providing access to information in a particular form;
(b) directing the public authority to appoint a Public Information Officer where none exists;
(c) publishing information or categories of information;
(d) making necessary changes to the practices relating to management, maintenance and destruction of records;
(e) enhancing training provision for officials on the right to information;
(f ) seeking an annual report from the public authority on compliance with this Act;
(g) requiring the public authority to compensate for any loss or other detriment suffered by the applicant;
(h) imposing penalties under this Act; and
(i) rejecting the application.
6. The Commission submits an annual report to the Central Government on the implementation of the provisions of this Act. The Central Government places this report before each House of Parliament.
7. When a public authority does not conform to the provisions of this Act, the Commission may recommend (to the authority) steps which ought to be taken for promoting such conformity.

STATE INFORMATION COMMISSION:
The Right to Information Act of 2005 provides for the creation of not only the Central Information Commission but also a State Information Commission at the state level. Accordingly, all the states have constituted the State Information Commissions through Official Gazette Notifications. The State Information Commission is a high-powered independent body which interalia looks into the complaints made to it and decide the appeals. It entertains complaints and appeals pertaining to offices, financial institutions, public sector undertakings, etc., under the concerned state government.

COMPOSITION OF STATE INFORMATION COMMISSION:
The Commission consists of a State Chief Information Commissioner and not more than ten State Information Commissioners1. They are appointed by the Governor on the recommendation of a committee consisting of the Chief Minister as Chairperson, the Leader of Opposition in the Legislative Assembly and a State Cabinet Minister nominated by the Chief Minister2. They should be persons of eminence in public life with wide knowledge and experience in law, science and technology, social service, management, journalism, mass media or administration and governance. They should not be a Member of Parliament or Member of the Legislature of any State or Union Territory. They should not hold any other office of profit or connected with any political party or carrying on any business or pursuing any profession.

TENURE AND SERVICE CONDITIONS OF STATE INFORMATION COMMISSION:
The State Chief Information Commissioner and a State Information Commissioner shall hold office for such term as prescribed by the Central Government or until they attain the age of 65 years, whichever is earlier. They are not eligible for reappointment.
The Governor can remove the State Chief Information Commissioner or any State Information Commissioner from the office under the following circumstances:
(a) if he is adjudged an insolvent; or
(b) if he has been convicted of an offence which (in the opinion of the Governor) involves a moral turpitude; or
(c) if he engages during his term of office in any paid employment outside the duties of his office; or
(d) if he is (in the opinion of the Governor) unfit to continue in office due to infirmity of mind or body; or
(e) if he has acquired such financial or other interest as is likely to affect prejudicially his official functions.
In addition to these, the Governor can also remove the State Chief Information Commissioner or any State Information Commissioner on the ground of proved misbehaviour or incapacity4. However, in these cases, the Governor has to refer the matter to the Supreme Court for an enquiry. If the Supreme Court, after the enquiry, upholds the cause of removal and advises so, then the Governor can remove him.
The salary, allowances and other service conditions of the State Chief Information  Commissioner and a State Information Commissioner shall be such as prescribed by the Central Government. But, they cannot be varied to his disadvantage during service.

POWERS AND FUNCTIONS OF STATE INFORMATION COMMISSION:
The powers and functions of the State Information Commission are:
1. It is the duty of the Commission to receive and inquire into a complaint from any person:
(a) who has not been able to submit an information request because of non-appointment of a Public Information Officer;
(b) who has been refused information that was requested;
(c) who has not received response to his information request within the specified time limits;
(d) who thinks the fees charged are unreasonable;
(e) who thinks information given is incomplete, misleading or false; and
(f) any other matter relating to obtaining information.
2. The Commission can order inquiry into any matter if there are reasonable grounds (suo-moto power).
3. While inquiring, the Commission has the powers of a civil court in respect of the following matters:
(a) summoning and enforcing attendance of persons and compelling them to give oral or written evidence on oath and to produce documents or things;
(b) requiring the discovery and inspection of documents;
(c) receiving evidence on affidavit;
(d) requisitioning any public record from any court or office;
(e) issuing summons for examination of witnesses or documents; and
(f) any other matter which may be prescribed.
4. During the inquiry of a complaint, the Commission may examine any record which is under the control of the public authority and no such record may be withheld from it on any grounds. In other words, all public records must be given to the Commission during inquiry for examination.
5. The Commission has the power to secure compliance of its decisions from the public authority. This includes:
(a) providing access to information in a particular form;
(b) directing the public authority to appoint a Public Information Officer where none exists;
(c) publishing information or categories of information;
(d) making necessary changes to the practices relating to management, maintenance and destruction of records;
(e) enhancing training provision for officials on the right to information;
(f) seeking an annual report from the public authority on compliance with this Act;
(g) requiring the public authority to compensate for any loss or other detriment suffered by the applicant;
(h) imposing penalties under this Act; and
(i) rejecting the application.
6. The Commission submits an annual report to the State Government on the implementation of the provisions of this Act. The State Government places this report before the State Legislature.
7. When a public authority does not conform to the provisions of this Act, the Commission may recommend (to the authority) steps which ought to be taken for promoting such conformity.

RIGHT TO INFORMATION (RTI) AMENDMENT ACT, 2019:
The various features or provisions of the Right to Information (Amendment) Act, 2019 are as follows:
1. It provided that the Chief Information Commissioner and an Information Commissioner shall hold office for such term as prescribed by the Central Government. Before this amendment, their term was fixed for 5 years.
2. It provided that the salary, allowances and other service conditions of the Chief Information Commissioner and an Information Commissioner shall be such as prescribed by the Central Government. Before this amendment, the salary, allowances and other service conditions of the Chief Information Commissioner were similar to those of the Chief Election Commissioner and that of an Information Commissioner were similar to those of an Election Commissioner.
3. It provided that the State Chief Information Commissioner and a State Information Commissioner shall hold office for such term as prescribed by the Central government. Before this amendment, their term was fixed for 5 years.
4. It provided that the salary, allowances and other service conditions of the State Chief Information Commissioner and a State Information Commissioner shall be such as prescribed by the Central Government. Before this amendment, the salary, allowances and other service conditions of the State Chief Information Commissioner were similar to those of an Election Commissioner and that of a State Information Commissioner were similar to those of the Chief Secretary of the state government.
5. It removed the provisions regarding deductions in salary of the Chief Information Commissioner, an Information Commissioner, the State Chief Information Commissioner and a State Information Commissioner due to pension or any other retirement benefits received by them for their previous government service.

CENTRAL VIGILANCE COMMISSION (CVC):

ESTABLISHMENT OF CENTRAL VIGILANCE COMMISSION (CVC):
The Central Vigilance Commission (CVC) is the main agency for preventing corruption in the Central government. It was established in 1964 by an executive resolution of the Central government. Its establishment was recommended by the Santhanam Committee on Prevention of Corruption (1962–64). Thus, originally the CVC was neither a constitutional body nor a statutory body. Later, in 2003, the Parliament enacted a law conferring statutory status on the CVC.
In 2004, the CVC has been designated as the agency to receive and act on complaints or disclosure on any allegation of corruption or misuse of office from whistle blowers under the “Public Interest Disclosure and Protection of Informers’ Resolution” (PIDPI), which is popularly known as “Whistle Blowers” Resolution. The Commission is also empowered as the only designated agency to take action against complainants making motivated or vexatious complaints.
The CVC is conceived to be the apex vigilance institution, free of control from any executive authority, monitoring all vigilance activity under the Central Government and advising various authorities in Central Government organisations in planning, executing, reviewing and reforming their vigilance work.

COMPOSITION OF CENTRAL VIGILANCE COMMISSION (CVC):
The CVC is a multi-member body consisting of a Central Vigilance Commissioner (chairperson) and not more than two vigilance commissioners. They are appointed by the president by warrant under his hand and seal on the recommendation of a threemember committee consisting of the prime minister as its head, the Union minister of home affairs and the Leader of the Opposition in the Lok Sabha. They hold office for a term of four years or until they attain the age of sixty five years, whichever is earlier. After their tenure, they are not eligible for further employment under the Central or a state government. The president can remove the Central Vigilance Commissioner or any vigilance commissioner from the office under the following circumstances:
(a) If he is adjudged an insolvent; or
(b) If he has been convicted of an offence which (in the opinion of the Central government) involves a moral turpitude; or
(c) If he engages, during his term of office, in any paid employment outside the duties of his office; or
(d) If he is (in the opinion of the president), unfit to continue in office by reason of infirmity of mind or body; or
(e) If he has acquired such financial or other interest as is likely to affect prejudicially his official functions.
In addition to these, the president can also remove the Central Vigilance Commissioner or any vigilance commissioner on the ground of proved misbehaviour or incapacity. However, in these cases, the president has to refer the matter to the Supreme Court for an enquiry. If the Supreme Court, after the enquiry, upholds the cause of removal and advises so, then the president can remove him. He is deemed to be guilty of misbehaviour, if he 
(a) is concerned or interested in any contract or agreement made by the Central government, or 
(b) participates in any way in the profit of such contract or agreement or in any benefit or emolument arising therefrom otherwise than as a member and in common with the other members of an incorporated company.

The salary, allowances and other conditions of service of the Central Vigilance Commissioner are similar to those of the Chairman of UPSC and that of the vigilance commissioner are similar to those of a member of UPSC. But they cannot be varied to his disadvantage after his appointment.

ORGANISATION:
The CVC has its own Secretariat, Chief Technical Examiners’ Wing (CTE) and a wing of Commissioners for Departmental Inquiries (CDIs).
Secretariat: The Secretariat consists of a Secretary, Joint Secretaries, Deputy Secretaries, Under Secretaries and office staff.
Chief Technical Examiners’ Wing: The Chief Technical Examiners’ Organisation constitutes the technical wing of the CVC. It consists of Chief Engineers (designated as Chief
Technical Examiners) and supporting engineering staff. The main functions assigned to this organisation are as follows:
(i) Technical audit of construction works of Government organisations from a vigilance angle
(ii) Investigation of specific cases of complaints relating to construction works
(iii) Extension of assistance to CBI in their investigations involving technical matters and for evaluation of properties in Delhi
(iv) Tendering of advice / assistance to the CVC and Chief Vigilance Officers in vigilance cases involving technical matters
Commissioners for Departmental Inquiries: The CDIs function as Inquiry Officers to conduct oral inquiries in departmental proceedings initiated against public servants.

The functions of the Central Vigilance Commission (CVC) are:
1. To inquire or cause an inquiry or investigation to be conducted on a reference made by the Central government wherein it is alleged that a public servant being an employee of the Central government or its authorities3 , has committed an offence under the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988.
2. To inquire or cause an inquiry or investigation to be conducted into any complaint against any official belonging to the below mentioned category of officials wherein it is alleged that he has committed an offence under the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988:
(a) Members of all-India services serving in the Union and Group ‘A’ officers of the Central government; and
(b) Specified level of officers of the authorities of the Central government.
3. To exercise superintendence over the functioning of the Delhi Special Police Establishment (CBI) insofar as it relates to the investigation of offences under the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988.
4. To give directions to the Delhi Special Police Establishment (CBI) for superintendence insofar as it relates to the investigation of offences under the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988.
5. To review the progress of investigations conducted by the Delhi Special Police Establishment into offences alleged to have been committed under the prevention of Corruption Act, 1988.
6. To review the progress of applications pending with the competent authorities for sanction of prosecution under the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988.
7. To tender advise to the Central government and its authorities on such matters as are referred to it by them.
8. To exercise superintendence over the vigilance administration in the ministries of the Central government or its authorities.
9. To undertake or cause an inquiry into complaints received under the Public Interest Disclosure and Protection of Informers’ Resolution and recommend appropriate action.
10. The Central Government is required to consult the CVC in making rules and regulations governing the vigilance and disciplinary matters relating to the members of Central Services and All India Services.
11. The Central Vigilance Commissioner (CVC) is the Chairperson and the two Vigilance Commissioners along with Secretaries of M/o Home Affairs, D/o Personnel and Training and the D/o Revenue in M/o Finance are the Members of the Selection Committees, on whose recommendation the Central Government appoints the Director of Enforcement. Further, this Committee, in consultation with the Director of Enforcement, recommends officers for appointments to the posts above the level of Deputy Director of Enforcement.
12. The Central Vigilance Commission has been notified as a specific authority to receive information relating to suspicious transactions under the Prevention of Money Laundering Act, 2002.
The Lokpal and Lokayuktas Act (2013) amended both the CVC Act (2003) and the Delhi Special Police Establishment Act (1946) and made the following changes with respect to the functions of the CVC.
13. The Director of Prosecution under the Directorate of Prosecution in CBI shall be appointed by the Central Government on the recommendation of the Central Vigilance Commission.
14. The Central Vigilance Commissioner (CVC) is the Chairperson and the two Vigilance Commissioners alongwith Secretaries of M/o Home Affairs and D/o Personnel and Training are the Members of the Selection Committees, on whose recommendation the Central Government appoints officers to the posts of the level of SP and above in the CBI except Director of CBI.
15. The Commission has been empowered to conduct preliminary inquiry into complaints referred by Lokpal in respect of officers and officials of Groups A, B, C & D, for which a Directorate of Inquiry for making preliminary inquiry is to be set up in the Commission. The preliminary inquiry reports in such matters referred by Lokpal in respect of Group A and B officers are required to be sent to the Lokpal by the Commission. Further, as per mandate, the Commission is to cause further investigation into such Lokpal references in respect of Group C and D officials and decide on further course of action against them.

JURISDICTION:
The jurisdiction of the CVC extends to the following:
1. Members of All India Services serving in connection with the affairs of the Union and Group A officers of the Central Government.
2. Officers of the rank of Scale V and above in the Public Sector Banks.
3. Officers in Grade D and above in Reserve Bank of India, NABARD and SIDBI.
4. Chief Executives and Executives on the Board and other officers of E-8 and above in Schedule ‘A’ and ‘B’ Public Sector Undertakings.
5. Chief Executives and Executives on the Board and other officers of E-7 and above in Schedule ‘C’ and ‘D’ Public Sector Undertakings.
6. Managers and above in General Insurance Companies. 
7. Senior Divisional Managers and above in Life Insurance Corporation.
8. Officers drawing salary of Rs. 8700/- per month (pre-revised) and above on Central Government D.A. pattern, as may be revised from time to time, in societies and local authorities owned or controlled by the Central Government.

WORKING:
The CVC conducts its proceedings at its headquarters (New Delhi). It is vested with the power to regulate its own procedure. It has all the powers of a civil court and its proceedings have a judicial character. It may call for information or report from the Central government or its authorities so as to enable it to exercise general supervision over the vigilance and anti-corruption work in them.
The CVC, on receipt of the report of the inquiry undertaken by any agency on a reference made by it, advises the Central government or its authorities as to the further course of action. The Central government or its authorities shall consider the advice of the CVC and take appropriate action. However, where the Central government or any of its authorities does not agree with the advice of the CVC, it shall communicate the reasons (to be recorded in writing) to the CVC.
The CVC has to present annually to the President a report on its performance. The President places this report before each House of Parliament.

VIGILANCE UNITS IN THE MINISTRIES:
All ministries/departments in the Union Government have a Chief Vigilance Officer (CVO) who heads the Vigilance Division of the organisation concerned, assisting and advising the Secretary or Head of Office in all matters pertaining to vigilance. He also provides a link between his organisation and the Central Vigilance Commission on the one hand and his organisation and the Central Bureau of Investigation on the other. Vigilance functions performed by the CVO include
(i) Collecting intelligence about corrupt practices of the
employees of his organisation
(ii) Investigating verifiable allegations reported to him
(iii) Processing investigation reports for further consideration of
the disciplinary authority concerned
(iv) Referring matters to the Central Vigilance Commission for
advice wherever necessary5

WHISTLE BLOWERS PROTECTION ACT (2014):
The salient features of the Whistle Blowers Protection Act (2014) are as follows:
1. The Act provides a mechanism for protecting the identity of whistle blowers (a term given to people who expose corruption). People who expose corruption in Government or irregularities by public functionaries can now be free of any fear of victimization.
2. The Act also provides for a system to encourage people to disclose information about corruption or the wilful misuse of power by public servants, including ministers.
3. As per the Act, a person can make a public interest disclosure on corruption before a competent authority which is at present the Central Vigilance Commission (CVC). The government, by notification, can appoint any other body also for receiving such complaints about corruption.
4. The Act, however, lays down punishment of up to two years in prison and a fine of up to ₹30,000 for false or frivolous complaints.
5. The Act says that every disclosure shall be made in good faith and the person making the disclosure shall provide a personal declaration stating that he reasonably believes that the information disclosed by him and the allegation contained therein is substantially true.
6. Disclosures can be made in writing or by email message in accordance with the procedure as may be prescribed and contain full particulars and be accompanied by supporting documents, or other material.
7. However, no action shall be taken on a disclosure if it does not indicate the identity of the complainant or public servant or if “the identity of the complainant or public servant is found to be incorrect.”
8. The Act is not applicable to the Special Protection Group.

CENTRAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION (CBI):
ESTABLISHMENT OF CENTRAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION (CBI):
The Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) was set up in 1963 by a resolution of the Ministry of Home Affairs. Later, it was transferred to the Ministry of Personnel and now it enjoys the status of an attached office1. The Special Police Establishment (which looked into vigilance cases) setup in 1941 was also merged with the CBI. The establishment of the CBI was recommended by the Santhanam Committee on Prevention of Corruption (1962–1964). The CBI is not a statutory body. It derives its powers from the Delhi Special Police Establishment Act, 1946.
The CBI is the main investigating agency of the Central Government. It plays an important role in the prevention of corruption and maintaining integrity in administration. It also provides assistance to the Central Vigilance Commission and Lokpal.
There is a difference between the nature of cases investigated by the National Investigation Agency (NIA) and the CBI. The NIA has been constituted after the Mumbai terror attack in 2008 mainly for investigation of incidents of terrorist attacks, funding of terrorism and other terror related crime, whereas the CBI investigates crime of corruption, economic offences and serious and organized crime other than terrorism.

MOTTO, MISSION AND VISION OF CBI:
Motto of CBI: Industry, Impartiality and Integrity Mission: To uphold the Constitution of India and law of the land through in-depth investigation and successful prosecution of offences; to provide leadership and direction to police forces and to act as the nodal agency for enhancing inter-state and international cooperation in law enforcement

Vision of CBI: Based on its motto, mission and the need to develop professionalism, transparency, adaptability to change and use of science and technology in its working, the CBI will focus on
1. Combating corruption in public life, curbing economic and violent crimes through meticulous investigation and prosecution
2. Evolving effective systems and procedures for successful investigation and prosecution of cases in various law courts 
3. Helping fight cyber and high technology crime
4. Creating a healthy work environment that encourages teambuilding, free communication and mutual trust
5. Supporting state police organisations and law enforcement agencies in national and international cooperation, particularly relating to enquiries and investigation of cases
6. Playing a lead role in the war against national and transnational organised crime
7. Upholding human rights, protecting the environment, arts, antiques and heritage of our civilisation
8. Developing a scientific temper, humanism and the spirit of inquiry and reform
9. Striving for excellence and professionalism in all spheres of functioning so that the organisation rises to high levels of endeavor and achievement.

ORGANISATION OF CBI:
Originally (1963), the CBI was set up with the following six divisions:
(i) Investigation and Anti-Corruption Division (Delhi Special Police Establishment)
(ii) Technical Division
(iii) Crime Records and Statistics Division
(iv) Research Division
(v) Legal and General Division
(vi) Administration Division
At present (2019), the CBI has the following seven divisions:
1. Anti-Corruption Division
2. Economic Offences Division
3. Special Crimes Division
4. Policy and Coordination Division
5. Administration Division
6. Directorate of Prosecution
7. Central Forensic Science Laboratory

COMPOSITION OF CBI:
The CBI is headed by a Director. He is assisted by a special director or an additional director. Additionally, it has a number of joint directors, deputy inspector generals, superintendents of police and all other usual ranks of police personnel. In total, it has about 5000 staff members, about 125 forensic scientists and about 250 law officers.
The Director of CBI as Inspector-General of Police, Delhi Special Police Establishment, is responsible for the administration of the organisation. With the enactment of CVC Act, 2003, the superintendence of Delhi Special Police Establishment vests with the Central Government save investigations of offences under the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988, in which, the superintendence vests with the Central Vigilance Commission. The Director of CBI has been provided security of two-year tenure in office by the CVC Act, 2003.
The Lokpal and Lokayuktas Act (2013) amended the Delhi Special Police Establishment Act (1946) and made the following changes with respect to the composition of the CBI:
1. The Central Government shall appoint the Director of CBI on the recommendation of a three-member committee consisting of the Prime Minister as Chairperson, the Leader of Opposition in the Lok Sabha and the Chief Justice of India or Judge of the Supreme Court nominated by him.
2. There shall be a Directorate of prosecution headed by a Director for conducting the prosecution of cases under the Lokpal and Lokayuktas Act, 2013. The Director of Prosecution shall be an officer not below the rank of Joint Secretary to the Government of India. He shall function under the overall supervision and control of the Director of CBI. He shall be appointed by the Central Government on the recommendation of the Central Vigilance Commission. He shall hold office for a period of two years.
3. The Central Government shall appoint officers of the rank of SP and above in the CBI on the recommendation of a committee consisting of the Central Vigilance Commissioner as Chairperson, the Vigilance Commissioners, the Secretary of the Home Ministry and the Secretary of the Department of Personnel.
Later, the Delhi Special Police Establishment (Amendment) Act, 2014 made a change in the composition of the committee related to the appointment of the Director of C.B.I. It states that where there is no recognized leader of opposition in the Lok Sabha, then the leader of the single largest opposition party in the Lok Sabha would be a member of that committee.

FUNCTIONS OF CBI:
The functions of CBI are:
(i) Investigating cases of corruption, bribery and misconduct of Central government employees.
(ii) Investigating cases relating to infringement of fiscal and economic laws, that is, breach of laws concerning export and import control, customs and central excise, income tax,
foreign exchange regulations and so on. However, such cases are taken up either in consultation with or at the request of the department concerned.
(iii) Investigating serious crimes, having national and international ramifications, committed by organised gangs of professional criminals.
(iv) Coordinating the activities of the anticorruption agencies and the various state police forces
(v) Taking up, on the request of a state government, any case of public importance for investigation.
(vi) Maintaining crime statistics and disseminating criminal information.

The CBI is a multidisciplinary investigation agency of the Government of India and undertakes investigation of corruptionrelated cases, economic offences and cases of conventional crime. It normally confines its activities in the anti-corruption field to offences committed by the employees of the Central Government and Union Territories and their public sector undertakings. It takes up investigation of conventional crimes like murder, kidnapping, rape etc., on reference from the state governments or when directed by the Supreme Court/High Courts. The CBI acts as the “National Central Bureau” of Interpol in India. The Interpol Wing of the CBI coordinates requests for investigation-related activities originating from Indian law enforcement agencies and the member countries of the Interpol.

PROVISION OF PRIOR PERMISSION:
The CBI is required to obtain the prior approval of the Central Government before conducting any inquiry or investigation into an offence committed by officers of the rank of joint secretary and above in the Central Government and its authorities. However, on May 6, 2014, the Supreme Court held as invalid the legal provision that makes prior sanction mandatory for the Central Bureau of Investigation to conduct a probe against senior bureaucrats in corruption cases under the Prevention of Corruption Act.

A Constitution Bench held that Section 6A of the Delhi Special Police Establishment Act, which granted protection to joint secretary and above officers from facing even a preliminary inquiry by the CBI in corruption cases, was violative of Article 14. Welcoming the court order, CBI Director said: “It is a landmark judgment that will empower the agency in the investigations into several cases pending due to the provision that has now been struck down by the Constitution Bench. We had for long been of the view that inquiry against senior officials need not require any prior permission.”

Writing the judgment, the CJI said, “Corruption is an enemy of [the] nation and tracking down a corrupt public servant, howsoever high he may be, and punishing such person is a necessary mandate under the PC Act, 1988. The status or position of a public servant does not qualify the person from exemption from equal treatment. The decision-making power does not segregate corrupt officers into two classes as they are common crime doers and have to be tracked down by the same process of inquiry and investigation.”

The Bench said, “Section 6A of the DSPE Act [granting protection to one set of officers] is directly destructive and runs counter to the object and reason of the PC Act, 1988. It also undermines the object of detecting and punishing high-level corruption. How can two public servants against whom there are allegations of corruption or graft or bribe taking or criminal misconduct under the PC Act, 1988, be made to be treated differently because one happens to be a junior officer and the other a senior decision maker?”

“The provision in Section 6A impedes tracking down the corrupt senior bureaucrats as without previous approval of the Central Government, the CBI cannot even hold preliminary inquiry much less an investigation into the allegations. The protection under Section 6A has propensity of shielding the corrupt,” the Bench added.

Observing that there could not be any protection to corrupt public servants, the Bench said, “The aim and object of investigation is ultimately to search for truth and any law that impedes that object may not stand the test of Article 14. Breach of rule of law, in our opinion, amounts to negation of equality under Article 14. Section 6-A fails in the context of these facets of Article 14.”

CBI VS. STATE POLICE
The role of the Special Police Establishment (a division of CBI) is supplementary to that of the state police forces. Along with state police forces, the Special Police Establishment (SPE) enjoys the concurrent powers of investigation and prosecution for offences under the Delhi Police Establishment Act, 1946. However, to avoid duplication and overlapping of cases between these two agencies, the following administrative arrangements have been made:
(i) The SPE shall take up such cases which are essentially and substantially concerned with the Central Government’s affairs or employees, even if they also involve certain state government employees.
(ii) The state police force shall take up such cases which are substantially concerned with the state government’s affairs or employees, even if they also involve certain Central Government employees.
(iii) The SPE shall also take up cases against employees of public undertakings or statutory bodies established and financed by the Central Government.

CBI ACADEMY:
The CBI Academy is located at Ghaziabad, Uttar Pradesh and started functioning in 1996. Earlier, training programmes were being conducted at the CBI Training Centre, New Delhi. The vision of the CBI Academy is “Excellence in Training in the Fields of Crime Investigation, Prosecution and Vigilance Functioning” and its mission is to train the human resources of CBI, state police and the vigilance organisations to become professional, industrious, impartial, upright and dedicated to the service of the nation.
The academy is the focal point of training activities within the organisation and is responsible for identification of suitable training programmes, regulation of nominations of trainees and preparation of the annual training calendar.
Beside the CBI Academy at Ghaziabad, there are three regional training centres imparting training at regional levels at Kolkata, Mumbai and Chennai.
There are two kinds of training courses which are being conducted in the CBI Academy:
(i) Short Term In-service Courses: For officers of the CBI, state police, central para-military forces and central government undertakings
(ii) Long Term Basic Courses: For directly recruited deputy superintendents of police, sub-inspectors and constables of CBI.

LOKPAL AND LOKAYUKTAS:
GLOBAL SCENARIO:
Modern democratic states are characterised by a welfare orientation. Hence, the government has come to play an important role in the socio-economic development of a nation. This has resulted in the expansion of bureaucracy and the multiplication of administrative process, which in turn increased the administrative power and discretion enjoyed by the civil servants at different levels of the government. The abuse of this power and discretion by civil servants opens up scope for harassment, malpractices, maladministration and corruption. Such a situation gives rise to citizens’ grievances against administration.
The success of democracy and the realisation of socio-economic development depends on the extent to which the citizens’ grievances are redressed. Therefore, the following institutional devices have been created in different parts of the world to deal with the redressal of these grievances:
1. The Ombudsman System
2. The Administrative Courts System
3. The Procurator System
The earliest democratic institution created in the world for the redressal of citizens’ grievance is the Scandinavian institution of Ombudsman. Donald C. Rowat, an international authority on the Ombudsman, calls it a “uniquely appropriate institution for dealing with the average citizens’ complaints about unfair administrative actions.”
The institution of Ombudsman was first created in Sweden in 1809. ‘Ombud’ is a Swedish term and refers to a person who acts as the representative or spokesman of another person. According to Donald C. Rowat, Ombudsman refers to “an officer appointed by the legislature to handle complaints against administrative and judicial action.”
The Swedish Ombudsman deals with the citizens’ grievances in the following matters:
(i) Abuse of administrative discretion, that is, misuse of official power and authority
(ii) Maladministration, that is, inefficiency in achieving the targets
(iii) Administrative corruption, that is, demanding bribery for doing things
(iv) Nepotism, that is supporting one’s own kith and kin in matters like providing employment
(v) Discourtesy, that is, misbehaviour of various kinds, for instance, use of abusive language.

The Swedish Ombudsman is appointed by the Parliament for a term of four years. He can be removed only by the Parliament on ground of its loss of confidence in him. He submits his annual report to the Parliament and hence, is also known as ‘Parliamentary Ombudsman.’ But he is independent of the Parliament (legislature) as well as the executive and judiciary.
The Ombudsman is a constitutional authority and enjoys the powers to supervise the compliance of laws and regulations by the public officials, and see that they discharge their duties properly. In other words, he keeps a watch over all public officials–civil, judicial and military–so that they function impartially, objectively and legally, that is, in accordance with the law. However, he has no power to reverse or quash a decision and has no direct control over administration or the courts.
The Ombudsman can act either on the basis of a complaint received from the citizen against unfair administrative action or suo moto (i.e. on his own initiative). He can prosecute any erring official including the judges. However, he himself cannot inflict any punishment. He only reports the matter to the higher authorities for taking the necessary corrective action.
In sum, the characteristics of the Swedish institution of Ombudsman are as follows:
(i) Independence of action from the executive
(ii) Impartial and objective investigation of complaints
(iii) Suo moto power to start investigations
(iv) Uninterrupted access to all the files of administration
(v) Right to report to the Parliament as opposed to the executive; the institution of ombudsman is based on the doctrine of administrative accountability to legislature.
(vi) Wide publicity given to its working in press and other media
(vii) Direct, simple, informal, cheap and speedy method of handling complaints

From Sweden, the institution of Ombudsman spread to other Scandinavian countries– Finland (1919), Denmark (1955) and Norway (1962). New Zealand is the first Commonwealth country in the world to have adopted the Ombudsman system in the form of a Parliamentary Commissioner for Investigation in 1962. The United Kingdom adopted Ombudsman-like institution called Parliamentary Commissioner for Administration in 1967. Since then, more than 40 counties of the world have adopted Ombudsman-like institutions with different nomenclature and functions. The Ombudsman in India is called Lokpal/Lokayukta. Donald. C. Rowat says that the institution of Ombudsman is a “bulkwork of democratic government against the tyranny of officialdom.” While Gerald E. Caiden described the Ombudsman as “institutionalised public conscience.”
Another unique institutional device created for the redressal of citizens’ grievances against administrative authorities, is the French system of Administrative Courts. Due to its success in France, the system has gradually spread to many other European and African countries like Belgium, Greece and Turkey.
The socialist countries like the former USSR (now Russia), China, Poland, Hungary, Czechoslovakia and Romania have created their own institutional device for the redressal of citizens’ grievances. It is called ‘Procurator System’ in these countries. It should be noted here that the office of the Procurator-General is still functioning in Russia. He is appointed for a tenure of seven years.

POSITION IN INDIA:
The existing legal and institutional framework to check corruption and redress citizens’ grievances in India consists of the following:
1. Public Servants (Enquiries) Act, 1850
2. Indian Penal Code, 1860
3. Special Police Establishment, 1941
4. Delhi Police Establishment Act, 1946
5. Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988
6. Commissions of Inquiry Act, 1952 (against political leaders and eminent public men)
7. All-India Services (Conduct) Rules, 1968
8. Central Civil Services (Conduct) Rules, 1964
9. Railway Services (Conduct) Rules, 1966
10. Vigilance organisations in ministries / departments, attached and subordinate offices and public undertakings
11. Central Bureau of Investigation, 1963
12. Central Vigilance Commission, 1964
13. State Vigilance Commissions, 1964
14. Anti corruption bureaus in states
15. Lokpal (Ombudsman) at the Centre
16. Lokayukta (Ombudsman) in states
17. Divisional Vigilance Board
18. District Vigilance Officer
19. National Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission
20. National Commission for SCs
21. National Commission for STs
22. Supreme Court and High Courts in states
23. Administrative Tribunals (quasi-judicial bodies)
24. Directorate of Public Grievances in the Cabinet Secretariat, 1988
25. Parliament and its committees
26. ‘File to Field’ programme in some states like Kerala. In this innovative scheme, the administrator goes to the village/area and hears public grievances and takes immediate action wherever possible.

LOKPAL:
The Administrative Reforms Commission (ARC) of India (1966–1970) recommended the setting up of two special authorities designated as ‘Lokpal’ and ‘lokayukta’ for the redressal of citizens’ grievances. These institutions were to be set up on the pattern of the institution of Ombudsman in Scandinavian countries and the parliamentary commissioner for investigation in New Zealand. The Lokpal would deal with complaints against ministers and secretaries at Central and state levels, and the lokayukta (one at the Centre and one in every state) would deal with complaints against other specified higher officials. The ARC kept the judiciary outside the purview of Lokpal and lokayukta as in New Zealand. But, in Sweden the judiciary is within the purview of Ombudsman.
According to the ARC, the Lokpal would be appointed by the president after consultation with the chief justice of India, the Speaker of Lok Sabha and the Chairman of the Rajya Sabha. The ARC also recommended that the institutions of Lokpal and lokayukta should have the following features:
1. They should be demonstratively independent and impartial.
2. Their investigations and proceedings should be conducted in private and should be informal in character.
3. Their appointment should be, as far as possible, non-political.
4. Their status should compare with the highest judicial functionaries in the country.
5. They should deal with matters in the discretionary field involving acts of injustice, corruption or favouritism.
6. Their proceedings should not be subject to judicial interference.
7. They should have the maximum latitude and powers in obtaining information relevant to their duties.
8. They should not look forward to any benefit or pecuniary advantage from the executive government.

The Government of India accepted the recommendations of ARC in this regard. So far, ten official attempts have been made to bring about legislation on this subject. Bills were introduced in the Parliament in the following years:
1. In May 1968, by the Congress Government headed by Indira Gandhi.
2. In April 1971, again by the Congress Government headed by Indira Gandhi.
3. In July 1977, by the Janata Government headed by Morarji Desai.
4. In August 1985, by the Congress Government headed by Rajiv Gandhi.
5. In December 1989, by the National Front Government headed by V.P. Singh.
6. In September 1996, by the United Front Government headed by Deve Gowda.
7. In August 1998, by the BJP-led coalition Government headed by A.B. Vajpayee.
8. In August 2001, by the NDA government headed by A.B. Vajpayee.
9. In August 2011, by the UPA government headed by Manmohan Singh.
10. In December 2011, by the UPA government headed by Manmohan Singh.
The first four bills lapsed due to the dissolution of Lok Sabha, while the fifth one was withdrawn by the government. The sixth and seventh bills also lapsed due to the dissolution of the 11th and 12th Lok Sabha. Again, the eighth bill (2001) lapsed due to the dissolution of the 13th Lok Sabha in 2004. The ninth bill (2011) was withdrawn by the government.

LOKPAL AND LOKAYUKTAS ACT (2013):
The salient features of the Lokpal and Lokayuktas Act (2013) are as follows.
1. It seeks to establish the institution of the Lokpal at the Centre and the Lokayukta at the level of the State and thus seeks to provide a uniform vigilance and anti-corruption road map for the nation both at the Centre and at the States. The jurisdiction of Lokpal includes the Prime Minister, Ministers, Members of Parliament and Groups A, B, C and D officers and officials of the Central Government.
2. The Lokpal to consist of a Chairperson with a maximum of 8 members of which 50% shall be judicial members.
3. 50% of the members of the Lokpal shall come from amongst the SCs, the STs, the OBCs, minorities and women.
4. The selection of the Chairperson and the members of Lokpal shall be through a Selection Committee consisting of the Prime Minister, the Speaker of the Lok Sabha, the Leader of the Opposition in the Lok Sabha, the Chief Justice of India or a sitting Supreme Court Judge nominated by the Chief Justice of India and an eminent jurist to be nominated by the President of India on the basis of recommendations of the first four members of the selection committee.
5. A Search Committee will assist the Selection Committee in the process of selection. 50% of the members of the Search Committee shall also be from amongst the SCs, the STs, the OBCs, minorities and women.
6. The Prime Minister has been brought under the purview of the Lokpal with subject matter exclusions and specific process for handling complaints against the Prime Minister.
7. Lokpal’s jurisdiction will cover all categories of public servants, including Group A, Group B, Group C, and Group D officers and employees of Government. On complaints referred to the CVC by the Lokpal, the CVC will send its report of preliminary enquiry in respect of Group A and Group B Officers back to the Lokpal for further decision. With respect to categories of employees from Group C and Group D, the CVC will proceed further in exercise of its own powers under the CVC Act subject to reporting and review by the Lokpal.
8. The Lokpal will have the power of superintendence and direction over any investigating agency, including the CBI, for cases referred to them by the Lokpal.
9. A High-Powered Committee chaired by the Prime Minister will recommend the selection of the Director of CBI.
10. It incorporates provisions for attachment and confiscation of property of public servants acquired by corrupt means, even while the prosecution is pending.
11. It lays down clear timelines. For preliminary enquiry, it is three months extendable by three months. For investigation, it is six months which may be extended by six months at a time. For trial, it is one year extendable by one year and to achieve this, special courts to be set up.
12. It enhances maximum punishment under the Prevention of Corruption Act from seven years to ten years. The minimum punishment under sections 7, 8, 9 and 12 of the Prevention of Corruption Act will now be three years, and the minimum punishment under section 15 (punishment for attempt) will now be two years.
13. Institutions which are financed fully or partly by Government are under the jurisdiction of Lokpal, but institutions aided by Government are excluded.
14. It provides adequate protection for honest and upright public servants.
15. Lokpal conferred with power to grant sanction for prosecution of public servants in place of the Government or competent authority.
16. It contains a number of provisions aimed at strengthening the CBI such as:
(i) setting up of a Directorate of Prosecution headed by a Director Prosecution under the overall control of the Director of CBI;
(ii) appointment of the Director of Prosecution on the recommendation of the CVC;
(iii) maintenance of a panel of advocates by CBI other the Government advocates with the consent of the Lokpal handling Lokpal-referred cases;
(iv) transfer of officers of CBI investigating cases referred by Lok with the approval of Lokpal;
(v) provision of adequate funds to CBI for investigating case referred by Lokpal.
17. All entities receiving donations from foreign source in the context of the Foreign Contribution Regulation Act (FCRA) in excess of Rs. 10 lakhs per year are brought under the jurisdiction of Lokpal.
18. It contains a mandate for setting up of the institution of Lokayukta through enactment of a law by the State Legislature within a period of 365 days from the date of commencement of this Act. Thus, the Act provides freedom to the states to decide upon the contours of the Lokayukta mechanism in their respective states.

Drawbacks
The following are the drawbacks (shortcomings) of the Lokpal and Lokayuktas Act, 20133a:
1. Lokpal cannot suo motu proceed against any public servant.
2. Emphasis on form of complaint rather than substance.
3. Heavy punishment for false and frivolous complaints against public servants may deter complaints being filed to Lokpal.
4. Anonymous complaints not allowed -Can’t just make a complaint on plain paper and drop it in a box with supporting documents.
5. Legal assistance to public servant against whom complaint is filed.
6. Limitation period of 7 years to file complaints.
7. Very non-transparent procedure for dealing with complaints against the PM.

LOKAYUKTAS:
Even much before the enactment of the Lokpal and Lokayuktas Act (2013) itself, many states had already set up the institution of Lokayuktas.
It must be noted here that the institution of lokayukta was established first in Maharashtra in 1971. Although Odisha had passed the Act in this regard in 1970, it came into force only in 1983. Till 2013, 21 states and 1 Union Territory (Delhi) have established the institution of Lokyuktas. 

The various aspects of the institution of lokayukta are:
Structural Variations:
The structure of the lokayukta is not same in all the states. Some States like Rajasthan, Karnataka, Andhra Pradesh and Maharashtra have created the lokayukta as well as upalo-kayukta, while some others like Bihar, Uttar Pradesh and Himachal Pradesh have created only the lokayukta. There are still other states like Punjab and Orissa that have designated officials as Lokpal. This pattern was not suggested by the ARC in the states.

Appointment:
The lokayukta and upalokayukta are appointed by the governor of the state. While appointing, the governor in most of the states consults 
(a) the chief justice of the state high court, and 
(b) the leader of Opposition in the state legislative assembly.

Qualifications:
Judicial qualifications are prescribed for the lokayukta in the States of Uttar Pradesh, Himachal Pradesh, Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat, Orissa, Karnataka and Assam. But no specific qualifications are prescribed in the states of Bihar, Maharashtra and Rajasthan.

Tenure:
In most of the states, the term of office fixed for lokayukta is of 5 years duration or 65 years of age, whichever is earlier. He is not eligible for reappointment for a second term.

Jurisdiction:
There is no uniformity regarding the jurisdiction of lokayukta in all the states. The following points can be noted in this regard:
(a) The chief minister is included within the jurisdiction of lokayukta in the states of Himachal Pradesh, Andhra Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh and Gujarat, while he is excluded from the purview of loka-yukta in the states of Maharashtra, Uttar Pradesh, Rajasthan, Bihar and Orissa.
(b) Ministers and higher civil servants are included in the purview of lokayukta in almost all the states. Maharashtra has also included former ministers and civil servants.
(c) Members of state legislatures are included in the purview of lokayukta in the States of Andhra Pradesh, Himachal Pradesh, Gujarat, Uttar Pradesh and Assam.
(d) The authorities of the local bodies, corporations, companies and societies are included in the jurisdiction of the lokayukta in most of the states.

Investigations:
In most of the states, the lokayukta can initiate investigations either on the basis of a complaint received from the citizen against unfair administrative action or suo moto. But he does not enjoy the power to start investigations on his own initiative (suo moto) in the States of Uttar Pradesh, Himachal Pradesh and Assam.

Scope of Cases Covered:
The lokayukta can consider the cases of ‘grievances’ as well as ‘allegations’ in the States of Maharashtra, Uttar Pradesh, Assam, Bihar and Karnataka. But, in Himachal Pradesh, Andhra Pradesh, Rajasthan and Gujarat, the job of lokayuktas is confined to investigating allegations (corruption) and not grievances (maladministration).

Other Features:
1. The lokayukta presents, annually, to the governor of the state a consolidated report on his performance. The governor places this report along with an explanatory memorandum before the state legislature. The lokayukta is responsible to the state legislature.
2. He takes the help of the state investigating agencies for conducting inquiries.
3. He can call for relevant files and documents from the state government departments.
4. The recommendations made by the loka-yukta are only advisory and not binding on the state government.

NATIONAL INVESTIGATION AGENCY (NIA):
ESTABLISHMENT OF THE NIA
The National Investigation Agency (NIA) was constituted in 2009 under the provisions of the National Investigation Agency Act, 2008 (NIA Act). It is the central counter-terrorism law enforcement agency in the country.
The NIA was established in the backdrop of the 2008 Mumbai terror attacks, popularly known as the 26/11 incident. This national horror led to the realisation of the need for a separate federal agency to deal with terror-related crimes in the country. The headquarters of the NIA is at New Delhi. The branch offices of the NIA are located at Hyderabad, Guwahati, Mumbai, Lucknow, Kochi, Kolkata, Jammu and Raipur. In addition, the NIA has a separate specialised cell known as TFFC Cell dealing with the subjects of fake currency notes and terror funding. The NIA is headed by a Director-General. He is appointed by the central government. His powers are similar to the powers exercisable by a Director-General of Police in respect of the police force in a state.
The NIA works under the administrative control of the Ministry of Home Affairs, Government of India. The state government extends all assistance and co-operation to the NIA for investigation of the offences specified under the NIA Act.

RATIONALE OF THE NATIONAL INVESTIGATION AGENCY (NIA):
While introducing the NIA Bill in the Parliament, the Government of India gave the following reasons for creating the NIA:
1. Over the past several years, India has been the victim of large-scale terrorism sponsored from across the borders. There have been innumerable incidents of terrorist attacks, not only in the militancy and insurgency affected areas and areas affected by left-wing extremism, but also in the form of terrorist attacks and bomb blasts, etc., in various parts of the hinterland and major cities, etc.
2. A large number of such incidents are found to have complex inter-state and international linkages, and possible connection with other activities like the smuggling of arms and drugs, pushing in and circulation of fake Indian currency, infiltration from across the borders, etc.
3. Keeping all these in view, it was felt that there was a need for setting up of an agency at the central level for the investigation of offences related to terrorism and certain other Acts, which have national ramifications.
4. Several expert committees and the Second Administrative Reforms Commission have also made recommendations for establishing such an agency.
5. The Government, after due consideration and examination of the issues involved, proposed to enact a legislation to make provisions for establishment of an NIA in a concurrent jurisdiction framework, with provisions for taking up specific cases under specific Acts for investigation. These provisions are proposed to be incorporated in the National Investigation Agency Bill, 2008.

FUNCTIONS OF THE NATIONAL INVESTIGATION AGENCY (NIA):
The NIA is mandated to investigate and prosecute offences under the various Acts mentioned in the Schedule of the NIA Act. In pursuance of its mandate, the NIA collects, collates and analyses counter-terrorism investigation. It also shares inputs with its sister intelligence agencies and law enforcement units both at central and state governments level.
In more detail, the functions assigned to the NIA are as follows:
(a) To investigate and prosecute offences in respect of the Acts specified in the Schedule of the NIA Act.
(b) To provide assistance to, and seek assistance from, other intelligence and investigation agencies of the central government and state governments.
(c) To take other such measures which may be necessary for speedy and effective implementation of the provisions of the NIA Act.

VISION OF THE NATIONAL INVESTIGATION AGENCY (NIA):
The following points highlight the vision of the NIA:
1. The NIA aims to be a thoroughly professional investigative agency matching the best international standards.
2. The NIA aims to set the standards of excellence in counterterrorism and other national security-related investigations at the national level by developing into a highly trained,
partnership-oriented workforce. 
3. The NIA aims at creating deterrence for existing and potential terrorist groups/ individuals.
4. The NIA aims to develop as a storehouse of all terroristrelated information.

MISSION OF THE NATIONAL INVESTIGATION AGENCY (NIA):
The mission of the NIA is as follows:
1. In-depth professional investigation of scheduled offences using the latest scientific methods of investigation and setting up such standards as to ensure that all cases entrusted to the NIA are detected.
2. Ensuring effective and speedy trial.
3. Developing into a thoroughly professional, result-oriented organisation, upholding the Constitution of India and laws of the land, giving prime importance to the protection of human rights and dignity of the individual.
4. Developing a professional workforce through regular training and exposure to the best practices and procedures.
5. Displaying scientific temper and progressive spirit while discharging the duties assigned.
6. Inducting modern methods and latest technology in every sphere of activities of the agency.
7. Maintaining professional and cordial relations with the governments of states and union territories and other law enforcement agencies in compliance with the legal
provisions of the NIA Act.
8. Assisting all states and other investigating agencies in investigation of terrorist cases.
9. Building a database on all terrorist-related information and sharing the available database with the states and other agencies.
10. Studying and analysing laws relating to terrorism in other countries and regularly evaluating the adequacy of existing laws in India and proposing changes as and when necessary.
11. Winning the confidence of the citizens of India through selfless and fearless endeavours.

JURISDICTION OF THE NATIONAL INVESTIGATION AGENCY (NIA):
The NIA has concurrent jurisdiction to investigate and prosecute the offences affecting the sovereignty, security and integrity of India, security of state, friendly relations with foreign states and offences under various Acts enacted to implement international treaties, agreements, conventions and resolutions of the UNO, its agencies and other international organisations. The NIA is empowered to probe terror attacks including bomb blasts, hijacking of aircrafts and ships, attacks on nuclear installations and use of weapons of mass destruction.
In 2019, the jurisdiction of the NIA was extended. Consequently, the NIA is also empowered to probe the offences relating to human trafficking, counterfeit currency or bank notes, manufacture or sale of prohibited arms, cyber-terrorism and explosive substances.

THE NATIONAL INVESTIGATION AGENCY (NIA) (AMENDMENT) ACT, 2019:
The various features or provisions of the amendment are as follows:
1. It applied the provisions of the NIA Act also to persons who commit a scheduled offence beyond India against Indian citizens or affecting the interest of India.
2. It provided that the officers of the NIA shall have the similar powers, duties, privies and liabilities being exercised by the police officers in connection with the investigation of offences, not only in India but also outside India.
3. It empowered the central government, with respect to a scheduled offence committed outside India, to direct the NIA to register the case and take up investigation as if such offence has taken place in India.
4. It provided that the central government and the state governments may designate Sessions Courts as Special Courts for conducting the trial of offences under the NIA Act.
5. It inserted certain new offences in the Schedule of the NIA Act.

NATIONAL DISASTER MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY (NDMA):

ESTABLISHMENT OF THE NATIONAL DISASTER MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY (NDMA):
The Government of India, recognising the importance of disaster management as a national priority, had set up a High Powered Committee in 1999 and a National Committee in 2001 after the Gujarat earthquake, to make recommendations on the preparation of disaster management plans and suggest effective mitigation mechanisms. However, after the Indian Ocean tsunami of 2004, the Government of India took a defining step in the legislative history of the country by enacting the Disaster Management Act, 2005.
The Act provided for the creation of the National Disaster Management Authority (NDMA) to spearhead and implement a holistic and integrated approach to disaster management in the country. Initially, the NDMA was constituted in 2005 by an Executive Order of the Government of India. Subsequently, the NDMA was notified in 2006 under the provisions of the Act.
The NDMA consists of a chairperson and other members, not exceeding nine. The Prime Minister is the ex-officio chairperson of the NDMA. The other members are nominated by the chairperson of the NDMA. The chairperson of the NDMA designates one of the members as the vice-chairperson of the NDMA. The vicechairperson has the status of a Cabinet Minister while the other members have the status of a Minister of State.
The NDMA is the apex body for disaster management in the country. It works under the administrative control of the Union Ministry of Home Affairs.
The NDMA was established with this vision: ‘To build a safer and disaster resilient India by a holistic, pro-active, technology driven and sustainable development strategy that involves all  stakeholders and fosters a culture of prevention, preparedness and mitigation’.

OBJECTIVES OF THE NATIONAL DISASTER MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY (NDMA):
The objectives of the NDMA are as follows:
1. To promote a culture of prevention, preparedness and resilience at all levels through knowledge, innovation and education.
2. To encourage mitigation measures based on technology, traditional wisdom and environmental sustainability.
3. To mainstream disaster management into the developmental planning process.
4. To establish institutional and techno-legal frameworks to create an enabling regulatory environment and a compliance regime.
5. To ensure efficient mechanism for identification, assessment and monitoring of disaster risks.
6. To develop contemporary forecasting and early warning systems backed by responsive and failsafe communication with information technology support.
7. To ensure efficient response and relief with a caring approach towards the needs of the vulnerable sections of the society.
8. To undertake reconstruction as an opportunity to build disaster resilient structures and habitat for ensuring safer living.
9. To promote a productive and proactive partnership with the media for disaster management.

FUNCTIONS OF THE NATIONAL DISASTER MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY (NDMA):
The NDMA has the responsibility for laying down the policies, plans and guidelines for disaster management for ensuring timely and effective response to disaster. The functions of the NDMA are as follows:
1. To lay down policies on disaster management.
2. To approve the National Plan.
3. To approve plans prepared by the Ministries or Departments of the Government of India in accordance with the National Plan.
4. To lay down guidelines to be followed by the State Disaster Management Authorities (SDMAs) in drawing up the State Plan.
5. To lay down guidelines to be followed by the different  Ministries or Departments of the Government of India for the purpose of integrating the measures for prevention of disaster or the mitigation of its effects in their development plans and projects.
6. To coordinate the enforcement and implementation of the policy and plan for disaster management.
7. To recommend provision of funds for the purpose of mitigation.
8. To provide such support to other countries affected by major disasters as may be determined by the central government.
9. To take other such measures for the prevention of disaster, or the mitigation, or preparedness and capacity building for dealing with the threatening disaster situation or disaster as it may consider necessary.
10. To lay down broad policies and guidelines for the functioning of the National Institute of Disaster Management4 .

ADDITIONAL FUNCTIONS OF THE NATIONAL DISASTER MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY (NDMA):
In addition to the above, the NDMA also performs the following functions:
1. It recommends guidelines for the minimum standards of relief to be provided to persons affected by disaster.
2. It recommends, in cases of disasters of severe magnitude, relief in repayment of loans or grant of fresh loans on concessional terms to the persons affected by such
disasters.
3. It exercises the general superintendence, direction and control of the National Disaster Response Force (NDRF). This force has been constituted for the purpose of specialist response to a threatening disaster situation or disaster.
4. It authorises the concerned department or authority to make the emergency procurement of provisions or materials for rescue or relief in any threatening disaster situation or disaster. In such case, the standard procedure requiring inviting of tenders is deemed to be waived.
5. It prepares an annual report on its activities and submits it to the central government. The central government causes it to be laid before both Houses of Parliament.

Composition of STATE DISASTER MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY (SDMA) :
Every state government should establish a State Disaster Management Authority (SDMA) for the state. An SDMA consists of a chairperson and other members, not exceeding nine. The Chief Minister of the state is the ex-officio chairperson of the SDMA. The chairperson of the State Executive Committee is the ex-officio member of the SDMA. The other members, not exceeding eight, are nominated by the chairperson of the SDMA. The chairperson of the SDMA designates one of the members as the vice-chairperson of the SDMA. The chairperson of the State Executive Committee acts as the ex-officio chief executive officer of the SDMA.

Functions of State Disaster Management Authority (SDMA)
An SDMA has the responsibility for laying down policies and plans for disaster management in the state. Its functions include the following:
1. To lay down the state disaster management policy.
2. To approve the State Plan in accordance with the guidelines laid down by the NDMA.
3. To approve the disaster management plans prepared by the departments of the government of the state.
4. To lay down guidelines to be followed by the departments of the government of the state for the purposes of integration of
measures for prevention of disasters and mitigation in their development plans and projects and provide necessary technical assistance thereof.
5. To coordinate the implementation of the State Plan.
6. To recommend provision of funds for mitigation and preparedness measures.
7. To review the development plans of the different departments of the state and ensure that prevention and mitigation measures are integrated therein.
8. To review the measures being taken for mitigation, capacity building and preparedness by the departments of the government of the state and issue such guidelines as may be necessary.

Composition of DISTRICT DISASTER MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY (DDMA):
Every state government should establish a District Disaster Management Authority (DDMA) for every district in the state. A DDMA consists of a chairperson and other members, not exceeding seven. The Collector (or District Magistrate or Deputy Commissioner) of the district is the ex-officio chairperson of the DDMA. The elected representative of the local authority is the exofficio co-chairperson of the DDMA. But, in case of Tribal Areas (as referred to in the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution of India), the chief executive member of the district council of autonomous district is the ex-officio co-chairperson of the DDMA. The chief executive officer of the DDMA, the superintendent of police and the chief medical officer of the district are the ex-officio members of the DDMA. Not more than two other district level officers are appointed by the state government as the members of the DDMA. In case of a district where Zilla Parishad exists, the chairperson of that Zilla Parishad is the co-chairperson of the DDMA. The chief executive officer of the DDMA is appointed by the state government.

Functions of DISTRICT DISASTER MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY (DDMA):
The DDMA acts as the district planning, coordinating and implementing body for disaster management and takes all measures for the purposes of disaster management in the district in accordance with the guidelines laid down by the NDMA and the SDMA. Its functions are as follows:
1. To prepare a disaster management plan including district response plan for the district.
2. To coordinate and monitor the implementation of the National Policy, State Policy, National Plan, State Plan and District Plan.
3. To ensure that the areas in the district vulnerable to disasters are identified and measures for the prevention of disasters and the mitigation of its effects are undertaken by
the departments of the government at the district level as well as by the local authorities.
4. To ensure that the guidelines for prevention of disasters, mitigation of its effects, preparedness and response measures as laid down by the NDMA and the SDMA are followed by all departments of the government at the district level and the local authorities in the district.
5. To organise and coordinate specialised training programmes  for different levels of officers, employees and voluntary rescue workers in the district.
6. To facilitate community training and awareness programmes for prevention of disaster or mitigation with the support of local authorities, governmental and non-governmental organisations.
7. To set up, maintain, review and upgrade the mechanism for early warnings and dissemination of proper information to the public.
8. To advise, assist and coordinate the activities of the departments of the government at the district level, statutory bodies and other governmental and nongovernmental organisations in the district engaged in disaster management.
9. To identify buildings and places which could, in the event of any threatening disaster situation or disaster, be used as relief centres or camps and make arrangements for water supply and sanitation in such buildings or places.
10. To perform such other functions as the state government or  SDMA may assign to it or as it deems necessary for disaster management in the District.

Co-operative Societies:
The 97th Constitutional Amendment Act of 2011 gave a constitutional status and protection to co-operative societies. In this context, it made the following three changes in the constitution:
1. It made the right to form co-operative societies a fundamental right (Article 191 ).
2. It included a new Directive Principle of State Policy on promotion of co-operative societies (Article 43-B2 ).
3. It added a new Part IX-B in the Constitution which is entitled “The Co-operative Societies” (Articles 243-ZH to 243-ZT).

Constitutional provisions for cooperative societies:
Part IX-B of the constitution contains the following provisions with respect to the cooperative societies:
Incorporation of Co-operative Societies: The state legislature may make provisions for the incorporation, regulation and winding-up of co-operative societies based on the principles of voluntary formation, democratic membercontrol, membereconomic participation and autonomous functioning. Number and Term of Members of Board and its Office Bearers: The board shall consist of such number of directors as may be provided by the state legislature. But, the maximum number of directors of a co-operative society shall not exceed twenty-one.
The state legislature shall provide for the reservation of one seat for the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes and two seats for women on the board of every co-operative society having members from such a category of persons. The term of office of elected members of the board and its office bearers shall be five years from the date of election. The state legislature shall make provisions for co-option of persons having experience in the field of banking, management, finance or specialisation in any other related field, as members of the board. But, the number of such co-opted members shall not exceed two (in addition to twenty-one directors). Further, the coopted members shall not have the right to vote in any election of the co-operative society or be eligible to be elected as office bearers of the board.
The functional directors of a co-operative society shall also be the members of the board and such members shall be excluded for the purpose of counting the total number of directors (that is, twenty-one). 

Election of Members of Board: The election of a board shall be conducted before the expiry of the term of the board so as to ensure that the newly elected members assume office immediately on the expiry of the term of the office of members of the outgoing board.
The superintendence, direction and control of the preparation of electoral rolls and the conduct of elections to a co-operative society shall vest in such body, as may be provided by the state legislature.

Supersession and Suspension of Board and Interim Management: No board shall be superseded or kept under suspension for a period exceeding six months. The board may be superseded or kept under suspension in case
(i) Of its persistent default
(ii) Of negligence in the performance of its duties
(iii) Of committing any act prejudicial to the interests of the cooperative society or its members
(iv) Of there being a stalement in the constitution or functions of the board
(v) Of the election body having failed to conduct elections in accordance with the provisions of the State Act.
However, the board of any such co-operative society shall not be superseded or kept under suspension where there is no Government shareholding or loan or financial assistance or any guarantee by the Government. In case of supersession of a board, the administrator appointed to manage the affairs of such a co-operative society shall arrange for conduct of elections within the period of six months and handover the management to the elected board.

Audit of Accounts of Co-operative Societies: The state legislature may make provisions for the maintenance of accounts by the co-operative societies and the auditing of such accounts at least once in each financial year. It shall lay down the minimum qualifications and experience of auditors and auditing firms that shall be eligible for auditing the accounts of the co-operative societies.
Every co-operative society shall be audited by an auditor or auditing firm, appointed by the general body of the co-operative society. But, such an auditor or auditing firm shall be appointed from a panel approved by the State Government or a body authorised by the State Government on this behalf.
The accounts of every co-operative society shall be audited within six months of the close of the financial year. The audit report of the accounts of an apex co-operative society shall be laid before the state legislature.

Convening of General Body Meetings: The state legislature may provide that the annual general body meeting of every cooperative society shall be convened within a period of six months of the close of the financial year. Right of a Member to Get

Information: The state legislature may provide for access to every member of a co-operative society to the books, information and accounts of the co-operative society. It may also make provisions to ensure the participation of members in the management of the co-operative society. Further, it may provide for co-operative education and training for its members.

Returns: Every co-operative society shall file returns, within six months of the close of every financial year, to the authority designated by the State Government. These returns shall include the following matters:
(a) Annual report of its activities
(b) Its audited statement of accounts
(c) Plan for surplus disposal as approved by the general body of the co-operative society
(d) List of amendments to the by-laws of the co-operative society
(e) Declaration regarding date of holding of its general body meeting and conduct of elections when due
(f) Any other information required by the Registrar in pursuance of any of the provisions of the State Act.

Offences and Penalties: The state legislature may make provisions for the offences relating to the co-operative societies and penalties for such offences. Such a law shall include the commission or omission of the following acts as offences:
(a) A co-operative society wilfully makes a false return or furnishes false information
(b) Any person wilfully disobeys any summon, requisition or order issued under the State Act
(c) Any employer who, without sufficient cause, fails to pay to a co-operative society the amount deducted from its employee within a period of fourteen days
(d) Any officer who wilfully fails to handover custody of books, accounts, documents, records, cash, security and other property belonging to a co-operative society to an authorised person
(e) Any person who adopts corrupt practices before, during or after the election of members of the board or office bearers.

Application to Multi-state Co-operative Societies: The provisions of this part shall apply to the multi-state co-operative societies subject to the modification that any reference to the “State Legislature”, “State Act” or “State Government” shall be construed as a reference to “Parliament”, “Central Act” or “Central Government” respectively.

Application to Union Territories: The provisions of this part shall apply to the Union territories. But, the President may direct that the provisions of this part shall not apply to any Union territory or part thereof as he may specify in the notification.

Continuance of Existing Laws: Any provision of any law relating to co-operative societies in force in a state immediately before the commencement of the Constitution (Ninetyseventh Amendment) Act, 2011, which is inconsistent with the provisions of this part, shall continue to be in force until amended or repealed or until the expiration of one year from such commencement, whichever is less.

REASONS FOR THE 97TH AMENDMENT:
The reasons for adding the above provisions in the Constitution by the 97th Constitutional Amendment Act of 2011 are as follows:
1. The co-operative sector, over the years, has made significant contribution to various sectors of national economy and has achieved voluminous growth. However, it has shown weaknesses in safeguarding the interests of the members and fulfilment of objects for which these institutions were organised. There have been instances where elections have been postponed indefinitely and nominated office bearers or administrators have remained in-charge of these institutions for a long time. This reduces the accountability in the management of co-operative societies to their members. Inadequate professionalism in management in many of the co-operative institutions has led to poor services and low productivity. Co-operatives need to run on well established democratic principles and elections held on time and in a free and fair manner. Therefore, there was a need to initiate fundamental reforms to revitalise these institutions in order to ensure their contribution in the economic development of the country and to serve the interests of members and public at large and also to ensure their autonomy, democratic functioning and professional management.
2. The “co-operative societies” is a subject enumerated in Entry 32 of the state list of the Seventh Schedule of the Constitution and the state legislatures have accordingly enacted legislations on co-operative societies. Within the framework of State Acts, growth of co-operatives on large scale was envisaged as part of the efforts for securing social and economic justice and equitable distribution of the fruits of development. It has, however, been experienced that in spite of considerable expansion of co-operatives, their performance in qualitative terms has not been up to the desired level. Considering the need for reforms in the Cooperative Societies Acts of the States, consultations with the State Governments have been held at several occasions and in the conferences of state co-operative ministers. A strong need has been felt for amending the Constitution so as to keep the co-operatives free from unnecessary outside interferences and also to ensure their autonomous organisational set up and their democratic functioning.
3. The Central Government was committed to ensure that the co-operative societies in the country function in a democratic, professional, autonomous and economically sound manner. With a view to bring the necessary reforms, it was proposed to incorporate a new part in the Constitution so as to provide for certain provisions covering the vital aspects of working of co-operative societies like democratic, autonomous and professional functioning. It was expected that these provisions will not only ensure the autonomous and democratic functioning of co-operatives, but also ensure the accountability of management to the members and other stakeholders and shall provide for deterrence for violation of the provisions of the law.

Official Language
Part XVII of the Constitution deals with the official language in Articles 343 to 351. Its provisions are divided into four heads–Language of the Union, Regional languages, Language of the judiciary and texts of laws and Special directives.

LANGUAGE OF THE UNION:
The Constitution contains the following provisions in respect of the official language of the Union.
1. Hindi written in Devanagari script is to be the official language of the Union. But, the form of numerals to be used for the official purposes of the Union has to be the international form of Indian numerals and not the Devanagari form of numerals.
2. However, for a period of fifteen years from the commencement of the Constitution (i.e., from 1950 to 1965), the English language would continue to be used for all the official purposes of the Union for which it was being used before 1950.
3. Even after fifteen years, the Parliament may provide for the continued use of English language for the specified purposes.
4. At the end of five years, and again at the end of ten years, from the commencement of the Constitution, the president should appoint a commission to make recommendations with regard to the progressive use of the Hindi language, restrictions on the use of the English language and other related issues.
5. A committee of Parliament is to be constituted to examine the recommendations of the commission and to report its views on them to the president.

Accordingly, in 1955, the president appointed an Official Language Commission under the chairmanship of B.G. Kher. The commission submitted its report to the President in 1956. The report was examined by a committee of Parliament constituted in 1957 under the chairmanship of Gobind Ballabh Pant. However, another Official Language Commission (as envisaged by the Constitution) was not appointed in 1960.
Subsequently, the Parliament enacted the Official Languages Act in 1963. The act provides for the continued use of English (even after 1965), in addition to Hindi, for all official purposes of the Union and also for the transaction of business in Parliament.
Notably, this act enables the use of English indefinitely (without any time-limit). Further, this act was amended in 1967 to make the use of English, in addition to Hindi, compulsory in certain cases.

REGIONAL LANGUAGES:
The Constitution does not specify the official language of different states. In this regard, it makes the following provisions:
1. The legislature of a state may adopt any one or more of the languages in use in the state or Hindi as the official language of that state. Until that is done, English is to continue as official language of that state. Under this provision, most of the states have adopted the major regional language as their official language. For example, Andhra Pradesh has adopted Telugu, Kerala– Malayalam, Assam–Assamese, West Bengal–Bengali, Odisha–Odia. The nine northern states of Himachal Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh, Uttarakhand, Madhya Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Bihar, Jharkhand, Haryana and Rajasthan have adopted Hindi. Gujarat has adopted Hindi in addition to Gujarati. Similarly, Goa has adopted Marathi in addition to Konkani. Jammu and Kashmir has adopted Urdu (and not Kashmiri). On the other hand, certain north-eastern States like Meghalaya, Arunachal Pradesh and Nagaland have adopted English. Notably, the choice of the state is not limited to the languages enumerated in the Eighth Schedule of the Constitution.
2. For the time being, the official language of the Union (i.e., English) would remain the link language for communications between the Union and the states or between various states. But, two or more states are free to agree to use Hindi (instead of English) for communication between themselves. Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh and Bihar are some of the states that have entered into such agreements. The Official Languages Act (1963) lays down that English should be used for purposes of communication between the Union and the non-Hindi states (that is, the states that have not adopted Hindi as their official language). Further, where Hindi is used for communication between a Hindi and a nonHindi state, such communication in Hindi should be accompanied by an English translation.
3. When the President (on a demand being made) is satisfied that a substantial proportion of the population of a state desire the use of any language spoken by them to be recognised by that state, then he may direct that such language shall also be officially recognised in that state. This provision aims at protecting the linguistic interests of minorities in the states.

LANGUAGE OF THE JUDICIARY AND TEXTS OF LAWS:
The constitutional provisions dealing with the language of the courts and legislation are as follows:
1. Until Parliament provides otherwise, the following are to be in the English language only:
(a) All proceedings in the Supreme Court and in every high court.
(b) The authoritative texts of all bills, acts, ordinances, orders, rules, regulations and bye-laws at the Central and state levels.
2. However, the governor of a state, with the previous consent of the president, can authorise the use of Hindi or any other official language of the state, in the proceedings in the high court of the state, but not with respect to the judgements, decrees and orders passed by it. In other words, the judgements, decrees and orders of the high court must continue to be in English only (until Parliament otherwise provides).
3. Similarly, a state legislature can prescribe the use of any language (other than English) with respect to bills, acts, ordinances, orders, rules, regulations or bye-laws, but a translation of the same in the English language is to be published. The Official Languages Act of 1963 lays down that Hindi translation of acts, ordinances, orders, regulations and bye-laws published under the authority of the president are deemed to be authoritative texts. Further, every bill introduced in the Parliament is to be accompanied by a Hindi translation. Similarly, there is to be a Hindi translation of state acts or ordinances in certain cases.
The act also enables the governor of a state, with the previous consent of the president, to authorise the use of Hindi or any other official language of the state for judgements, decrees and orders passed by the high court of the state but they should be accompanied by an English translation. For example, Hindi is used in Uttar Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, Bihar and Rajasthan for this purpose.
However, the Parliament has not made any provision for the use of Hindi in the Supreme Court. Hence, the Supreme Court hears only those who petition or appeal in English. In 1971, a petitioner insisted on arguing in Hindi a habeas corpus petition in the Supreme Court. But, the Court cancelled his petition on the ground that the language of the Court was English and allowing Hindi would be unconstitutional.
The Authorised Translations (Central Laws) Act of 1973 lays down that a Translation in any regional language specified in the Eight Schedule to the Constitution (other than Hindi) of any central act, ordinance, order, rule, regulation and bye-law published under the authority of the President in the Official Gazette is deemed to be the authoritative texts thereof in such language.

SPECIAL DIRECTIVES:
The Constitution contains certain special directives to protect the interests of linguistic minorities and to promote the development of Hindi language. There are:
Protection of Linguistic Minorities:
In this regard, the Constitution makes the following provisions:
1. Every aggrieved person has the right to submit a representation for the redress of any grievance to any officer or authority of the Union or a state in any of the languages used in the Union or in the state, as the case may be. This means that a representation cannot be rejected on the ground that it is not in the official language.
2. Every state and a local authority in the state should provide adequate facilities for instruction in the mother-tongue at the primary stage of education to children belonging to linguistic minority groups. The president can issue necessary directions for this purpose.
3. The president should appoint a special officer for linguistic minorities to investigate all matters relating to the constitutional safeguards for linguistic minorities and to report to him. The president should place all such reports before the Parliament and send to the state government concerned.

Development of Hindi Language:
The Constitution imposes a duty upon the Centre to promote the spread and development of the Hindi language so that it may become the lingua franca of the composite culture of India7 . Further, the Centre is directed to secure the enrichment of Hindi by assimilating the forms, style and expressions used in hindustani and in other languages specified in the Eighth Schedule and by drawing its vocabulary, primarily on sanskrit and secondarily on other languages.
At present (2019), the Eighth Schedule of the Constitution specifies 22 languages (originally 14 languages). These are Assamese, Bengali, Bodo, Dogri (Dongri), Gujarati, Hindi, Kannada, Kashmiri, Konkani, Mathili (Maithili), Malayalam, Manipuri, Marathi, Nepali, Odia8 , Punjabi, Sanskrit, Santhali, Sindhi, Tamil, Telugu and Urdu. Sindhi was added by the 21st Amendment Act of 1967; Konkani, Manipuri and Nepali were added by the 71st Amendment Act of 1992; and Bodo, Dongri, Maithili and Santhali were added by the 92nd Amendment Act of 2003.
In terms of the Constitution provisions, there are two objectives behind the specification of the above regional languages in the Eighth Schedule:
(a) the members of these languages are to be given representation in the Official Language Commission; and
(b) the forms, style and expression of these languages are to be used for the enrichment of the Hindi language.

COMMITTEE OF PARLIAMENT ON OFFICIAL LANGUAGE
The Official Languages Act (1963) provided for the setting up of a Committee of Parliament on Official Language to review the progress made in the use of Hindi for the official purpose of the Union. Under the Act, this Committee was to be constituted after ten years of the promulgation of the Act (i.e., 26th January, 1965). Accordingly, this Committee was set up in 1976. This Committee comprises of 30 members of Parliament, 20 from Lok Sabha and 10 from Rajya Sabha.
The Act contains the following provisions relating to the composition and functions of the committee:
1. After the expiration of ten years from the date on which the Act comes into force, there shall be constituted a Committee on Official Language, on a resolution to that effect being moved in either House of Parliament with the previous sanction of the President and passed by both Houses.
2. The Committee shall consist of thirty members, of whom twenty shall be members of the House of the People and ten shall be members of the Council of States to be elected respectively by the members of the House of the People and the members of the Council of States in accordance with the system of proportional representation by means of the single transferable vote.
3. It shall be the duty of the Committee to review the progress made in the use of Hindi for the official purposes of the Union and submit a report to the President making recommendations thereon and the President shall cause the report to be laid before each House of Parliament and sent it to all the State Governments.
4. The President may, after consideration of the report, and the views, expressed by the State Governments thereon, issue directions in accordance with the whole or any part of the report.
The Chairman of the Committee is elected by the members of the Committee. As a convention, the Union Home Minister has been elected as Chairman of the Committee from time to time.
The Committee is required to submit its report alongwith its recommendations to the President after reviewing the position regarding the use of Hindi in Central Government Offices on the basis of its observations. Apart from adopting other methods for assessing the factual position, the Committee decided to inspect certain Central Government offices representing various fields of activities to motivate the Central Government offices to adopt maximum usage of Hindi so that the objectives of the Constitution and Official Languages Act provisions could be achieved. With this end in view, the Committee set up three sub-Committees and for the purpose of inspection by the three sub-Committees, the various Ministries/Departments etc. were divided into three different groups.
Further, in order to assess the use of Official Language for various purposes and other matters connected therewith, it was also decided to invite eminent persons from various fields such as from education, judiciary, voluntary organizations and the Secretaries of the Ministries/Departments etc., for oral evidence. The progressive use of Hindi in the Central Government offices is being reviewed by the Committee in the background of the provisions relating to Official Language as provided by the Constitution; the Official Languages Act, 1963 and the Rules framed thereunder. The Committee also takes note of the circulars/ instructions etc. issued by the Government in this regard from time to time. The terms of reference of the Committee being comprehensive, it has also been examining other relevant aspects like the medium of instructions in schools, colleges and the universities; mode of recruitment to Central Government services and medium of departmental examination etc. Taking into consideration the magnitude of various aspects of the Official Language policy and keeping in view the present circumstances, the Committee in its meeting held in June, 1985 and August, 1986 decided to present its report to the President in parts; each part relating to a particular aspect of the Official Language policy. The Secretariat of the Committee is headed by the Secretary of the Committee. The Secretary is assisted by the officers of the level of Under Secretary and other officials. They extend all required assistance in performing the various activities of the Committee. For administrative purposes, this office is subordinate office of Department of Official Language, Ministry of Home Affairs.

CLASSICAL LANGUAGE STATUS:
In 2004, the Government of India decided to create new category of languages called as “classical languages”. In 2006, it laid down the criteria for conferring the classical language status. So far (2019), the six languages are granted the classical language status.

Benefits of clasiccal language:
Once a language is declared classical, it gets financial assistance for setting up a centre of excellence for the study of that language and also opens up an avenue for two major awards for scholars of eminence. Besides, the University Grants Commission can be requested to create - to begin with at least in Central Universities a certain number of professional chairs for classical languages for scholars of eminence in the language.

Criteria  for declaring a language as classical:
The criteria for declaring a language as classical mandates high antiquity of its early texts/recorded history over a period of 1,500– 2,000 years, a body of ancient lit-erature/texts which is considered a valuable heritage by generations of speakers and a literary tradition that is original and not borrowed from another speech community. Also since the classical language and literature is distinct from the modern, there can also be a discontinuity between the classical language and its later forms or its offshoots.

Public Services:
CLASSIFICATION OF SERVICES:
The public services (civil services or government services) in India are classified into three categories–all-India services, Central services and state services. Their meaning and composition are:
All-India Services:
All-India services are those services which are common to both Central and state governments. The members of these services occupy top positions (or key posts) under both the Centre and the states and serve them by turns.
At present, there are three all-India services. They are:
1. Indian Administrative Service (IAS)
2. Indian Police Service (IPS)
3. Indian Forest Service (IFS)
In 1947, the Indian Civil Service (ICS) was replaced by IAS, and the Indian Police (IP) was replaced by IPS and were recognised by the Constitution as all-India services. In 1966, the Indian Forest Service was established as the third all-India service.
The All-India Services Act of 1951 authorised the Central government to make rules in consultation with the state governments for the regulation of recruitment and service conditions of the members of all-India services. The members of these services are recruited and trained by the Central government but are assigned to different states for work. They belong to different state cadres; the Centre having no cadre of its own in this regard. They serve the Central government on deputation and after completing their fixed tenure they go back to their respective states. The Central government obtains the services of these officers on deputation under the well-known tenure system. It must be noted here that irrespective of their division among different states, each of these all-India services form a single service with common rights and status and uniform scales of pay throughout the country. Their salaries and pensions are met by the states.
The all-India services are controlled jointly by the Central and state governments. The ultimate control lies with the Central government while the immediate control is vested in the state governments. Any disciplinary action (imposition of penalties) against these officers can only be taken by the Central government.
Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel was the chief protagonist of all-India services in the Constituent Assembly. Hence, he came to be regarded as the ‘Father of all-India Services’.

Central Services:
The personnel of Central services work under the exclusive jurisdiction of the Central government. They hold specialised (functional and technical) positions in various departments of the Central government.
Before Independence, the Central services were classified into class-I, class-II, subordinate and inferior services. After Independence, the nomenclature of subordinate and inferior services was replaced by class-III and class-IV services. Again in 1974, the classification of Central services into class-I, class-II, class-III and class-IV was changed to group A, group B, group C and group D, respectively.
At present, there are 62 group A Central services. Some of them are:
1. Central Engineering Service.
2. Central Health Service.
3. Central Information Service.
4. Central Legal Service.
5. Central Secretariat Service.
6. Indian Audit and Accounts Service.
7. Indian Defence Accounts Service.
8. Indian Economic Service.
9. Indian Foreign Service.
10. Indian Meteorological Service.
11. Indian Postal Service.
12. Indian Revenue Service (Customs, Excise and Income Tax)
13. Indian Statistical Service.
14. Overseas Communication Service.
15. Railway Personnel Service.
Most of the above cadres of group A Central services have also corresponding group B services. The group C Central services consists of clerical personnel while group D consists of manual personnel. Thus group A and group B comprises of gazetted officers while group C and group D are non-gazetted.
Among all, the Indian Foreign Service (IFS) is the highest central service in terms of prestige, status, pay and emoluments. In fact, it (though a central service) competes with the all-India services in position, status and pay scales. It comes next to the IAS in ranking and its pay scale is higher than the IPS.

State Services:
The personnel of state services work under the exclusive jurisdiction of the state government. They hold different positions (general, functional and technical) in the departments of the state government. However, they occupy lower positions (in the administrative hierarchy of the state) than those held by the members of the all-India services (IAS, IPS and IFS).
The number of services in a state differ from state to state. The services that are common to all the states are:
1. Civil Service.
2. Police Service.
3. Forest Service.
4. Agricultural Service.
5. Medical Service.
6. Veterinary Service.
7. Fisheries Service.
8. Judicial Service.
9. Public Health Service.
10. Educational Service.
11. Co-operative Service.
12. Registration Service.
13. Sales Tax Service.
14. Jail Service.
15. Service of Engineers.
Each of these services is named after the state, that is, name of the state is added as a prefix. For example, in Andhra Pradesh (AP), they are known as AP Civil Service, AP Police Service, AP Forest Service, AP Agricultural Service, AP Medical Service, AP Veterinary Service, AP Fisheries Service, AP Judicial Service, and so on. Among all the state services, the civil service (also known as the administrative service) is the most prestigious. Like the Central services, the state services are also classified into four categories: class I (group I or group A), class II (group II or group B), class III (group III or group C) and class IV (group IV or group D).
Further, the state services are also classified into gazetted class and non-gazetted class. Usually, Class I (Group-A) and Class-II (Group-B) Services are gazetted classes while Class-III (Group-C) and Class-IV (Group-D) services are non-gazetted classes. The names of the members of gazetted class are published in the Government Gazette for appointment, transfer, promotion and retirement, while those of the non-gazetted are not published. Further, the members of the gazetted class enjoy some privileges which are denied to the members of non-gazetted class. Also, the members of the gazetted class are called ‘officers’ while those of non-gazetted are called ‘employees’.
The All-India Services Act of 1951 specifies that senior posts not exceeding thirty-three and one third per cent in the Indian Administrative Service (IAS), Indian Police Service (IPS) and Indian Forest Service (IFS) are required to be filled in by promotion of officers employed in the state services. Such promotions are made on the recommendation of selection committee constituted for this purpose in each state. Such a committee is presided over by the Chairman or a member of UPSC.

CONSTITUTIONAL PROVISIONS:
Articles 308 to 314 in part XIV of the Constitution contain provisions with regard to all-India services, Central services and state services.
1. Recruitment and Service Conditions:
Article 309 empowers the Parliament and the state legislatures to regulate the recruitment and the conditions of service of the persons appointed to public services and posts under the Centre and the states, respectively. Until such laws are made, the president or the governor can make rules to regulate these matters.
Recruitment includes any method provided for inducting a person in public service like appointment, selection, deputation, promotion and appointment by transfer.
The conditions of service of a public servant includes pay, allowances, periodical increments, leave, promotion, tenure or termination of service, transfer, deputation, various types of rights, disciplinary action, holidays, hours of work and retirement benefits like pension, provident fund, gratuity and so on.
Under this provision, the Parliament or the state legislature can impose ‘reasonable’ restrictions on the Fundamental Rights of public servants in the interests of integrity, honesty, efficiency, discipline, impartiality, secrecy, neutrality, anonymity, devotion to duty and so on. Such restrictions are mentioned in the conduct rules like Central Services (Conduct) Rules, Railway Services (Conduct) Rules and so on.

2. Tenure of Office:
According to Article 310, members of the defence services, the civil services of the Centre and the all-India services or persons holding military posts or civil posts under the Centre, hold office during the pleasure of the president. Similarly, members of the civil services of a state or persons holding civil posts under a state, hold office during the pleasure of the governor of the state.
However, there is an exception to this general rule of dismissal at pleasure. The president or the governor may (in order to secure the services of a person having special qualifications) provide for the payment of compensation to him in two cases: 
(i) if the post is abolished before the expiration of the contractual period, or 
(ii) if he is required to vacate that post for reasons not connected with misconduct on his part. Notably, such a contract can be made only with a new entrant, that is, a person who is not already a member of a defence service, a civil service of the Centre, an all-India service or a civil service of a state.

3. Safeguards to Civil Servants:
Article 311 places two restrictions on the above ‘doctrine of pleasure’. In other words, it provides two safeguards to civil servants against any arbitrary dismissal from their posts:
(a) A civil servant cannot be dismissed or removed by an authority subordinate to that by which he was appointed.
(b) A civil servant cannot be dismissed or removed or reduced in rank except after an inquiry in which he has been informed of the charges against him and given a reasonable opportunity of being heard in respect of those charges.
The above two safeguards are available only to the members of the civil services of the Centre, the all-India services, the civil services of a state or to persons holding civil posts under the Centre or a state and not to the members of defence services or persons holding military posts.
However, the second safeguard (holding inquiry) is not available in the following three cases:
(a) Where a civil servant is dismissed or removed or reduced in rank on the ground of conduct which has led to his conviction on a criminal charge; or
(b) Where the authority empowered to dismiss or remove a civil servant or to reduce him in rank is satisfied that for some reason (to be recorded in writing), it is not reasonably practicable to hold such inquiry; or
(c) Where the president or the governor is satisfied that in the interest of the security of the state, it is not expedient to hold such inquiry.
Originally, the opportunity of being heard was given to a civil servant at two stages–at the inquiry stage, and at the punishment stage. But, the 42nd Amendment Act of 1976 abolished the provision for second opportunity (that is, the right of a civil servant to make representation against the punishment proposed as a result of the findings of the inquiry). Hence, the present position is that where it is proposed (after inquiry) to impose upon a civil servant the punishment of dismissal, removal or reduction in rank, it may be imposed on the basis of the evidence adduced at the inquiry without giving him any opportunity of making representation on the penalty proposed.
The Supreme Court held that the expression ‘reasonable opportunity of being heard’ envisaged to a civil servant (in the second safeguard mentioned above) includes:
(a) an opportunity to deny his guilt and establish his innocence which he can only do if he is told what the charges levelled against him are and the allegations on which such charges are based;
(b) an opportunity to defend himself by cross-examining the witnesses produced against him and by examining himself or any other witnesses in support of his defence; and
(c) the disciplinary authority must supply a copy of the inquiry officer’s report to the delinquent civil servant for observations and comments before the disciplinary authority considers the report.

4. All-India Services:
Article 312 makes the following provisions in respect of all-India services:
(a) The Parliament can create new allIndia services (including an all-India judicial service), if the Rajya Sabha passes a resolution declaring that it is necessary or expedient in the national interest to do so. Such a resolution in the Rajya Sabha should be supported by two-thirds of the members present and voting. This power of recommendation is given to the Rajya Sabha to protect the interests of states in the Indian federal system.
(b) Parliament can regulate the recruitment and conditions of service of persons appointed to all-India services. Accordingly, the Parliament has enacted the All-India Services Act, 1951 for the purpose.
(c) The services known at the commencement of the Constitution (that is, January 26, 1950) as the Indian Administrative Service and the Indian Police Service are deemed to be services created by Parliament under this provision.
(d) The all-India judicial service should not include any post inferior to that of a district judge6. A law providing for the creation of this service is not to be deemed as an amendment of the Constitution for the purposes of Article 368.
Though the 42nd Amendment Act of 1976 made the provision for the creation of allIndia judicial service, no such law has been made so far.

5. Other Provisions:
Article 312 A (inserted by the 28th Amendment Act of 1972) confers powers on the Parliament to vary or revoke the conditions of service of persons who were appointed to a civil service of the Crown in India before 1950. Article 313 deals with transitional provisions and says that until otherwise provided, all the laws in force before 1950 and applicable to any public service would continue. Article 314 which made provision for protection of existing officers of certain services was repealed by the 28th Amendment Act of 1972.

Rights and Liabilities of the Government:
Articles 294 to 300 in Part XII of the Constitution deal with the property, contracts, rights, liabilities, obligations and suits of the Union and the states. In this regard, the Constitution makes the Union or the states as juristic (legal) persons.

PROPERTY OF THE UNION AND THE STATES:
1. Succession:
All property and assets that were vested in the Dominion of India or a province or an Indian princely state, before the commencement of the present Constitution, became vested in the Union or the corresponding state. Similarly, all rights, liabilities and obligations of the government of the dominion of India or a province or an Indian state would now be the rights, liabilities and obligations of the Government of India or the corresponding state.

2. Escheat, Lapse and Bona Vacantia:
Any property in India that would have accrued to King of England or ruler of Indian state (princely) by escheat (death of a person inte-state without any heir), lapse (termination of rights through disuse or failure to follow appropriate procedures) or bona vacantia (property found without any owner) for want of a rightful owner, would now vest in the state if the property is situated there, and in the Union, in any other case. In all these three cases, the property accrues to the government as there is no rightful owner (claimant).

3. Sea-Wealth:
All lands, minerals and other things of value under the waters of the ocean within the territorial waters of India, the continental shelf of India and the exclusive economic zone of India vests in the Union. Hence, a state near the ocean cannot claim jurisdiction over these things.
India’s territorial waters extend to a distance of 12 nautical miles from the appropriate base line. Similarly, India’s exclusive economic zone extends upto 200 nautical miles.

4. Compulsory Acquisition by Law:
The Parliament as well as the state legislatures are empowered to make laws for the compulsory acquisition and requisitioning of private property by the governments. Further, the 44th Amendment Act (1978) has also abolished the constitutional obligation to pay compensation in this regard except in two cases: (a) when the government acquires the property of a minority educational institution; and (b) when the government acquires the land held by a person under his personal cultivation and the land is within the statutory ceiling limits.

5. Acquisition under Executive Power:
The Union or a state can acquire, hold and dispose property under the exercise of its executive power. Further, the executive power of the Union or a state extends to the carrying on any trade or business within and in other states also.

SUITS BY OR AGAINST THE GOVERNMENT:
Article 300 of the Constitution deals with the suits by or against the Government in India. It lays down that the Government of India may sue or be sued by the name of the Union of India and government of a state may sue or be sued by the name of that state, eg, State of Andhra Pradesh or State of Uttar Pradesh and so on. Thus, the Union of India and states are legal entities (juristic personalities) for purposes of suits and proceedings, not the Government of the Union or government of states.
Regarding the extent of the governmental liability, the Constitution (Article 300) declares that the Union of India or states can sue or be sued in relation to their respective affairs in the like cases as the dominion of India and the corresponding provinces or Indian states might have sued or been sued before the Constitution. This provision is subject to any law made by Parliament or a state legislature. But, no such law has been enacted so far. Hence, at present, the position in this respect remains the same as it existed before the Constitution. In the preConstitution period (i.e., from the days of the East India Company up to the commencement of the Constitution in 1950), the government was suable for contracts but not for torts (wrongs committed by its servants) in respect of its sovereign functions.
This is explained in detail as follows:
1. Liability for Contracts:
Under the exercise of its executive power, the Union or a state can enter into contracts for the acquisition, holding and disposal of property, or to carry on any trade or business, or for any other purpose. But, the Constitution lays down three conditions which must be fulfilled by such contracts:
(a) They must be expressed to be made by the president or governor, as the case may be;
(b) They must be executed on behalf of the president or governor, as the case may be; and
(c) They must be executed by such person or in such manner as the president or governor may direct or authorise.
These conditions are mandatory and not merely directory in nature. Failure to comply with them nullifies the contracts and renders them void and unenforceable in the courts.
Further, the president or the governor is not personally liable in respect of any contract executed in his name. Similarly, the officer executing the contract is also not personally liable. This immunity is purely personal and does not immunize the government from a contractual liability, making the government suable in contracts. This means that the contractual liability of the Union government and the state governments is the same as that of an individual under the ordinary law of contract, which has been the position in India since the days of the East India Company.

2. Liability for Torts:
In the beginning, the East India Company was only a trading body. Gradually, it acquired territories in India and became a sovereign authority. The Company was suable for its functions as a trader but not as a sovereign. This immunity of the Company in respect of its sovereign functions was based on the English Common Law maxim that the ‘King can do no wrong’, which means that the King was not liable for wrongs of his servants. This traditional immunity of the State (i.e., Crown) in Britain from any legal liability for any action has been done away by the Crown Proceedings Act (1947). However, the position in India still remains the same.
Therefore, the government (Union or states) in India can be sued for torts (civil wrongs) committed by its officials only in the exercise of its non-sovereign functions but not in the sovereign functions like administering justice, constructing a military road, commandeering goods during war, etc. This distinction between the sovereign and nonsovereign functions of the Government in India and the immunity of the government in respect of its sovereign functions was established in the famous P and O Steam Navigation Company case3 (1861). This was reaffirmed by the Supreme Court in the post-independence era in the Kasturilal case4 (1965). However, after this case, the Supreme Court started giving a restrictive interpretation to sovereign functions of the government and awarded compensation to victims in a large number of cases.
In Nagendra Rao Case (1994), the Supreme Court criticised the doctrine of sovereign immunity of the State and adopted a liberal approach with respect to the tortuous liability of the State. It ruled that when a citizen suffers any damage due to the negligent act of the servants of the State, the State would be liable to pay compensation for it and the State cannot avoid this liability on the ground of sovereign immunity. It held that in the modern sense, the distinction between sovereign and non-sovereign functions does not exist. It laid down the proposition that barring a few functions, the State cannot claim any immunity. Its observations, in this case, are as follows:
1. No civilised system can permit an executive to play with the people of its country and claim that it is entitled to act in any manner as it is sovereign. The concept of public interest has changed with structural change in the society. No legal or political system today can place the State above law as it is unjust and unfair for a citizen to be deprived of his property illegally by negligent act of officers of the State without any remedy.
2. The modern social thinking of progressive societies and the judicial approach is to do away with archaic State protection and place the State or the Government at par with any other juristic legal entity. Any water-tight compartmentalisation of the functions of the State as “sovereign” and “non-sovereign” or “governmental” and “non-governmental” is not sound. It is contrary to modern jurisprudential thinking.
3. The need of the State, duty of its officials and right of the citizens are required to be reconciled so that the rule of law in a welfare State is not shaken. In a welfare State, the functions of the State are not only the defence of the country or administration of justice or maintaining law and order but it extends to regulating and controlling the activities of the people in almost every sphere–educational, commercial, social, economic, political and even marital.
4. The demarcating line between sovereign and non-sovereign powers for which no rational basis survives has largely disappeared. Therefore, barring functions such as administration of justice, maintenance of law and order and repression of crime etc., which are among the primary and inalienable functions of a constitutional Government, the State cannot claim any immunity.
In the above case, the Supreme Court did not overrule its judgement in the Kasturilal case (1965). However, it said that it is applicable to rare and limited cases.
In Common Cause Case (1999), the Supreme Court again examined the whole doctrine and rejected the sovereign immunity rule. The Court held that the rule of State liability as laid down in P. & O. Steam Navigation Company case is very outmoded. It said that in modern times when the State activities have been considerably increased it is very difficult to draw a line between its sovereign and non-sovereign functions. The increased activities of the State have made a deep impression on all facets of citizens’ life, and therefore, the liability of the State must be made coextensive with the modern concept of a welfare State. The State must be liable for all tortuous acts of its employees, whether done in exercise of sovereign or non-sovereign powers. Finally, the court observed that the efficacy of Kasturilal case as a binding precedent has been eroded.
In the Prisoner’s Murder case (2000), the Supreme Court ruled that in the process of judicial advancement Kasturilal case has paled into insignificance and is no longer of any binding value.

SUITS AGAINST PUBLIC OFFICIALS:
1. President and Governor:
The Constitution confers certain immunities to the president of India and governor of states with regard to their official acts and personal acts. These are:
(a) Official Acts:
The president and the governors cannot be sued during the term of their office or thereafter, for any act done by them in the exercise and performance of their official powers and duties. However, the official conduct of the president can be reviewed by a court, tribunal or any other body authorised by either House of Parliament to investigate charges for impeachment. Further, the aggrieved person can bring appropriate proceedings against the Union of India instead of the president and the state instead of the Governor of that state.
(b) Personal Acts:
No criminal proceedings can be started against the president and the governors in respect of their personal acts nor can they be arrested or imprisoned. This immunity is limited to the period of the term of their office only and does not extend beyond that. However, civil proceedings can be started against them during their term of office in respect of their personal acts after giving two months’ advance notice.

2. Ministers:
The Constitution does not grant any immunity to the ministers for their official acts. But, since they are not required to countersign (as in Britain) the official acts of the president and the governors, they are not liable in the courts for those acts5. Moreover, they are not liable for the official acts done by the president and the governors on their advice as the courts are debarred from inquiring into such advice. However, the ministers do not enjoy any immunity for their personal acts, and can be sued for crimes as well as torts in the ordinary courts like common citizens.

3. Judicial Officers:
The judicial officers enjoy immunity from any liability in respect of their official acts and hence, cannot be sued. The Judicial Officers Protection Act (1850) lays down that, ‘no judge, magistrate, justice of peace, collector or other person acting judicially shall be liable to be sued in any civil court for any act done by him in the discharge of his official duty’.

4. Civil Servants:
Under the Constitution, the civil servants are conferred personal immunity from legal liability for official contracts. This means that the civil servant who made a contract in his official capacity is not personally liable in respect of that contract but it is the government (Central or state) that is liable for the contract. But, if the contract is made without complying the conditions specified in the Constitution, then the civil servant who made the contract is personally liable. Further, the civil servants also enjoy immunity from legal liability for their tortious acts in respect of the sovereign functions of the government. In other cases, the liability of the civil servants for torts or illegal acts is the same as of any ordinary citizen. Civil proceedings can be instituted against them for anything done in their official capacity after giving a two months’ advance notice. But, no such notice is required when the action is to be brought against them for the acts done outside the scope of their official duties. Criminal proceedings can be instituted against them for acts done in their official capacity, with the prior permission of the president or the governor, where necessary6 .


Special Provisions Relating to Certain Classes:
RATIONALE OF SPECIAL PROVISIONS:
In order to realise the objectives of equality and justice as laid down in the Preamble, the Constitution makes special provisions for the scheduled castes (SCs), the scheduled tribes (STs), the backward classes (BCs) and the Anglo-Indians. These special provisions are contained in Part XVI of the Constitution from Articles 330 to 342A. They are related to the following:
1. Reservation in Legislatures
2. Special Representation in Legislatures
3. Reservation in Services and Posts
4. Educational Grants
5. Appointment of National Commissions
6. Appointment of Commissions of Investigation
These special provisions can be classified into the following broad categories:
(a) Permanent and Temporary – Some of them are a permanent feature of the Constitution, while some others continue to operate only for a specified period.
(b) Protective and Developmental – Some of them aim at protecting these classes from all forms of injustice and exploitation, while some others aim at promoting their socioeconomic interests.

SPECIFICATION OF CLASSES:
The Constitution does not specify the castes or tribes which are to be called the SCs or the STs. It leaves to the President the power to specify as to what castes or tribes in each state and union territory are to be treated as the SCs and STs. Thus, the lists of the SCs or STs vary from state to state and union territory to union territory. In case of the states, the President issues the notification after consulting the governor of the state concerned. But, any inclusion or exclusion of any caste or tribe from Presidential notification can be done only by the Parliament and not by a subsequent Presidential notification. Presidents have issued several orders specifying the SCs and STs in different states and union territories and these have also been amended by the Parliament.
Similarly, the constitution has not specified the classes of citizens who are to be called the socially and educationally backward classes, also known as Other Backward Classes (OBCs). The 102nd Amendment Act of 2018 empowered the President to specify the socially and educationally backward classes in relation to a state or union territory. In case of a state, the President issues the notification after consultation with the governor of the state concerned. But, any inclusion in or exclusion from the Central List of socially and educationally backward classes specified in a Presidential notification can be done only by the Parliament and not by a subsequent Presidential notification.
Unlike in the case of SCs, STs and OBCs, the Constitution has defined the persons who belong to the Anglo-Indian community. Accordingly, ‘an Anglo-Indian means a person whose father or any of whose other male progenitors in the male line is or was of European descent but who is domiciled within the territory of India and is or was born within such territory of parents habitually resident therein and not established there for temporary purposes only’. 

COMPONENTS OF SPECIAL PROVISIONS:
1. Reservation for SCs and STs and Special:
Representation for Anglo-Indians in Legislatures: Seats are to be reserved for the SCs and STs in the Lok Sabha and the state legislative assemblies on the basis of population ratios.
The President can nominate two members of the AngloIndian community to the Lok Sabha, if the community is not adequately represented. Similarly, the governor of a state can nominate one member of the Anglo-Indian community to the state legislative assembly, if the community is not adequately represented.
Originally, these two provisions of reservation and special representation were to operate for ten years (i.e., up to 1960) only. But this duration has been extended continuously since then by ten years each time. Now, under the 95th Amendment Act of 2009, these two provisions of reservation and special representation are to last until 2020. The reasons for the extension of the above two provisions of reservation and special representation by the 95th Amendment Act of 2009 are as follows:
(i) Article 334 of the Constitution lays down that the provisions of the Constitution relating to the reservation of seats for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes and the representation of the Anglo-Indian community by nomination in the House of the People and the Legislative Assemblies of the States shall cease to have effect on the expiration of the period of sixty years from the commencement of the Constitution. In other words, these provisions will cease to have effect on the 25th January, 2010, if not extended further.
(ii) Although the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes have made considerable progress in the last sixty years, the reasons which weighed with the Constituent Assembly in making provisions with regard to the aforesaid reservation of seats and nomination of members have not ceased to exist. It is, therefore, proposed to continue the reservation for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes and the representation of the Anglo-Indian community by nomination for a further period of ten years.
The reason for this special representation to the AngloIndians is as follows: “Anglo-Indians constitute a religious, social, as well as a linguistic minority. These provisions were necessary, for, otherwise, being numerically an extremely small community, and being interspersed all over India, the Anglo-Indians could not hope to get any seat in any legislature through election”.

2. Claims of SCs and STs to Services and Posts:  The claims of the SCs and STs are to be taken into consideration while making appointments to the public services of the Centre and the states, without sacrificing the efficiency of administration. However, the 82nd Amendment Act of 2000 provides for making of any provision in favour of the SCs and STs for relaxation in qualifying marks in any examination or lowering the standards of evaluation, for reservation in matters of promotion to the public services of the Centre and the states.

3. Special Provision in Services and Educational Grants for Anglo-Indians: Before independence, certain posts were reserved for the Anglo-Indians in the railway, customs, postal and telegraph services of the Union. Similarly, the Anglo-Indian educational institutions were given certain special grants by the Centre and the states. Both the benefits were allowed to continue under the Constitution on a progressive diminution basis and finally came to an end in 1960.

4. National Commissions for SCs and STs: The President should set up a National Commission for the SCs to investigate all matters relating to the constitutional safeguards for the SCs and to report to him (Article 338). Similarly, the President should also set up a National Commission for the STs to investigate all matters relating to the Constitutional safeguards for the STs and to report to him (Article 338-A). The President should place all such reports before the Parliament, along with the action taken memorandum. Previously, the Constitution provided for a combined National Commission for SCs and STs. The 89th Amendment Act of 2003 bifurcated the combined commission into two separate bodies.
The National Commission for SCs is also required to discharge similar functions with regard to the Anglo-Indian Community as it does with respect to the SCs. In other words, the commission has to investigate all matters relating to the Constitutional and other legal safeguards for the Anglo-Indian community and report to the President upon their working.

5. National Commission for BCs: The National Commission for BCs was set-up in 1993 by an Act of Parliament. Later, the 102nd Amendment Act of 2018 conferred a constitutional status on the commission. For this purpose, the amendment inserted a new Article 338-B in the constitution. Accordingly, the President should set-up a National Commission for the socially and educationally BCs to investigate all matters relating to the constitutional safeguards for the socially and educationally BCs and to report to him. The President should place all such reports before the Parliament, along with the action taken memorandum.

6. Control of the Union over the Administration of Scheduled Areas and the Welfare of STs: The President is required to appoint a commission to report on the administration of the scheduled areas and the welfare of the STs in the states. He can appoint such a commission at any time but compulsorily after ten years of the commencement of the Constitution. Hence, a commission was appointed in the year 1960. It was headed by U.N. Dhebar and submitted its report in 1961. After four decades, the second commission was appointed in 2002 under the chairmanship of Dilip Singh Bhuria. It submitted its report in 2004. Further, the executive power of the Centre extends to the giving of directions to a state with respect to the drawing up and execution of schemes for the welfare of the STs in the state.

7. Appointment of a Commission to Investigate the Conditions of BCs: The President may appoint a commission to investigate the conditions of socially and educationally backward classes and to recommend the steps to improve their condition. The report of the commission is to be placed before the Parliament, along with action taken memorandum. Under the above provision, the President has appointed two commissions so far. The first backward classes commission was appointed in 1953 under the chairmanship of Kaka Kalelkar. It submitted its report in 1955. But, no action was taken on it as the recommendations were considered to be too vague and impractical and also there was a sharp division among the members on the criterion of backwardness. The second Backward Classes Commission was appointed in 1979 with B.P. Mandal as chairman. It submitted its report in 1980. Its recommendations were also lying unattended till 1990 when the V.P. Singh Government declared reservation of 27 percent government jobs for the OBCs.

Political Parties:

MEANING AND TYPES OF POLITICAL PARTIES:
Political parties are voluntary associations or organised groups of individuals who share the same political views and who try to gain political power through constitutional means and who desire to work for promoting the national interest. There are four types of political parties in the modern democratic states, viz., 
(i) reactionary parties which cling to the old socio-economic and political institutions; 
(ii) conservative parties which believe in the status-quo; 
(iii) liberal parties which aim at reforming the existing institutions; and 
(iv) radical parties which aim at establishing a new order by overthrowing the existing institutions. 
In their classification of political parties on the basis of ideologies, the political scientists have placed the radical parties on the left and the liberal parties in the centre and reactionary and conservative parties on the right. In other words, they are described as the leftist parties, centrist parties and the rightist parties. In India, the CPI and CPM are the examples of leftist parties, the Congress of centrist parties and the BJP is an example of rightist parties.

There are three kinds of party systems in the world, viz., 
(i) one party system in which only one ruling party exists and no opposition is permitted, as for example, in the former communist countries like the USSR and other East European countries; 
(ii) two-party system in which two major parties exists, as for example, in USA and Britain ; and 
(iii) multi-party system in which there are a number of political parties leading to the formation of coalition governments, as for example, in France, Switzerland and Italy.

PARTY SYSTEM IN INDIA:
The Indian party system has the following characteristic features:
Multi-Party System:
The continental size of the country, the diversified character of Indian society, the adoption of universal adult franchise, the peculiar type of political process, and other factors have given rise to a large number of political parties. In fact, India has the largest number of political parties in the world. On the eve of seventeenth Lok Sabha general elections (2019), there were 7 national parties, 52 state parties and 2354 registered - unrecognised parties in the country. Further, India has all categories of parties–left parties, centrist parties, right parties, communal parties, non-communal parties and so on. Consequently, the hung Parliaments, hung assemblies and coalition governments have become a common phenomena.

One-Dominant Party System:
In spite of the multiparty system, the political scene in India was dominated for a long period by the Congress. Hence, Rajni Kothari, an eminent political analyst, preferred to call the Indian party system as ‘one party dominance system’ or the ‘Congress system’3. The dominant position enjoyed by the Congress has been declining since 1967 with the rise of regional parties and other national parties like Janata (1977), Janata Dal (1989) and the BJP (1991) leading to the development of a competitive multiparty system.

Lack of Clear Ideology:
Except the BJP and the two communist parties (CPI and CPM), all other parties do not have a clear-cut ideology. They (i.e., all other parties) are ideologically closer to each other. They have a close resemblance in their policies and programmes. Almost every party advocates democracy, secularism, socialism and Gandhism. More than this, every party, including the so-called ideological parties, is guided by only one consideration–power capture. Thus, politics has become issuebased rather than the ideology and pragmatism has replaced the commitment to the principles.

Personality Cult:
Quite often, the parties are organised around an eminent leader who becomes more important than the party and its ideology. Parties are known by their leaders rather than by their manifesto. It is a fact that the popularity of the Congress was mainly due to the leadership of Nehru, Indira Gandhi and Rajiv Gandhi. Similarly, the AIADMK in Tamil Nadu and TDP in Andhra Pradesh got identified with MG Ramachandran and NT Rama Rao respectively. Interestingly, several parties bear the name of their leader like Biju Janata Dal, Lok Dal (A), Congress (I) and so on. Hence, it is said that “there are political personalities rather than political parties in India”.

Based on Traditional Factors:
In the western countries, the political parties are formed on the basis of socio-economic and political programme. On the other hand, a large number of parties in India are formed on the basis of religion, caste, language, culture, race and so on. For example, Shiv Sena, Muslim League, Hindu Maha Sabha, Akali Dal, Muslim Majlis, Bahujan Samaj Party, Republican Party of India, Gorkha League and so on. These parties work for the promotion of communal and sectional interests and thereby undermine the general public interest.

Emergence of Regional Parties:
Another significant feature of the Indian party system is the emergence of a large number of regional parties and their growing role. They have become the ruling parties in various states like BJD in Orissa, DMK or AIADMK in Tamil Nadu, Akali Dal in Punjab, AGP in Assam, National Conference in J&K, JD(U) in Bihar and so on. In the beginning, they were confined to the regional politics only. But, of late, they have come to play a significant role in the national politics due to coalition governments at the Centre. In the 1984 elections, the TDP emerged as the largest opposition party in the Lok Sabha.

Factions and Defections:
Factionalism, defections, splits, mergers, fragmentation, polarisation and so on have been an important aspect of the functioning of political parties in India. Lust for power and material considerations have made the politicians to leave their party and join another party or start a new party. The practice of defections gained greater currency after the fourth general elections (1967). This phenomenon caused political instability both at the Centre and in the states and led to disintegration of the parties. Thus, there are two Janata Dals, two TDPs, two DMKs, two Communist Parties, two Congress, three Akali Dals, three Muslim Leagues and so on.

Lack of Effective Opposition:
An effective Opposition is very essential for the successful operation of the parliamentary democracy prevalent in India. It checks the autocratic tendencies of the ruling party and provides an alternative government. However, in the last 50 years, an effective, strong, organised and viable national Opposition could never emerge except in flashes. The Opposition parties have no unity and very often adopt mutually conflicting positions with respect to the ruling party. They have failed to play a constructive role in the functioning of the body politic and in the process of nation building.

RECOGNITION OF NATIONAL AND STATE PARTIES:
The Election Commission registers political parties for the purpose of elections and grants them recognition as national or state parties on the basis of their poll performance. The other parties are simply declared as registered-unrecognised parties. The recognition granted by the Commission to the parties determines their right to certain privileges like allocation of the party symbols, provision of time for political broadcasts on the state-owned television and radio stations and access to electoral rolls.
Further, the recognized parties need only one proposer for filing the nomination. Also, these parties are allowed to have forty “star campaigners” during the time of elections and the registeredunrecognized parties are allowed to have twenty “star campaigners”. The travel expenses of these star campaigners are not included in the election expenditure of the candidates of their parties.
Every national party is allotted a symbol exclusively reserved for its use throughout the country. Similarly, every state party is allotted a symbol exclusively reserved for its use in the state or states in which it is so recognised. A registered-unrecognised party, on the other hand, can select a symbol from a list of free symbols. In other words, the Commission specifies certain symbols as ‘reserved symbols’ which are meant for the candidates set up by the recognised parties and others as ‘free symbols’ which are meant for other candidates.

Conditions for Recognition as a National Party:
At present (2019), a party is recognised as a national party if any of the following conditions is fulfilled:
1. If it secures six per cent of valid votes polled in any four or more states at a general election to the Lok Sabha or to the legislative assembly; and, in addition, it wins four seats in the Lok Sabha from any state or states; or
2. If it wins two per cent of seats in the Lok Sabha at a general election; and these candidates are elected from three states; or
3. If it is recognised as a state party in four states.

Conditions for Recognition as a State Party:
At present (2019), a party is recognised as a state party in a state if any of the following conditions is fulfilled:
1. If it secures six per cent of the valid votes polled in the state at a general election to the legislative assembly of the state concerned; and, in addition, it wins 2 seats in the assembly of the state concerned; or
2. If it secures six per cent of the valid votes polled in the state at a general election to the Lok Sabha from the state concerned; and, in addition, it wins 1 seat in the Lok Sabha from the state concerned; or
3. If it wins three per cent of seats in the legislative assembly at a general election to the legislative assembly of the state concerned or 3 seats in the assembly, whichever is more; or
4. If it wins 1 seat in the Lok Sabha for every 25 seats or any fraction thereof allotted to the state at a general election to the Lok Sabha from the state concerned; or
5. If it secures eight per cent of the total valid votes polled in the state at a General Election to the Lok Sabha from the state or to the legislative assembly of the state. This condition was added in 2011.
The number of recognised parties keeps on changing on the basis of their performance in the general elections. On the eve of the seventeenth Lok Sabha general elections (2019), there were 7 national parties, 52 state parties and 2354 registeredunrecognised parties in the country6. The national parties and state parties are also known as all-India parties and regional parties respectively.

Role of Regional Parties
The presence of a large number of regional parties is an important feature of the Indian Political System. They have come to play a vital role in Indian politics at all levels, i.e. local, state and national. This is more so in the context of the new era of coalition politics.

FEATURES OF REGIONAL PARTIES:
Following are the features of a regional party:
1. It generally operates within a particular state or specific region. Its electoral base is limited to a single region.
2. It articulates regional interests and identifies itself with a particular cultural, religious, linguistic or ethnic group.
3. It is primarily concerned with exploiting the local resources of discontent or preserving a variety of primordial demands based on language, caste or community or region.
4. It focuses on local or regional issues and aims to capture political power at the state level. It has no inclination to expand and control the central government.
5. It has a political desire for greater regional autonomy of states in the Indian Union.

CLASSIFICATION OF REGIONAL PARTIES:
The various regional parties in India can be classified into the following four categories:
1. Those regional parties which are based on the regional culture or ethnicity. These include Shiromani Akali Dal, National Conference, DMK, AIADMK, Telugu Desam, Shiv Sena, Asom Gana Parishad, Mizo National Front, Jharkhand Mukti Morcha and so on.
2. Those regional parties which have an all-India outlook but lack a national electoral base. The examples are Indian National Lok Dal, All-India Forward Bloc, Revolutionary Socialist Party, Samajwadi Party, Nationalist Congress Party and so on.
3. Those regional parties which have been formed by a split in national parties. For example, Bangla Congress, Bharatiya Kranti Dal, Utkal Congress, Kerala Congress, Telangana Praja Samithi, Biju Janata Dal, Rashtriya Janata Dal, Janata Party, Samajwadi Janata Party, Samata Party, Trinamool Congress, YSR Congress and so on.
4. Those regional parties which have been formed by individual leaders on the basis of their charismatic personality. These are called as personalised parties and they are short-lived. The examples are Lok Janshakti Party, Haryana Vikas Party, Himachal Vikas Congress, Congress (J) and so on.

RISE OF REGIONAL PARTIES:
There are multiple reasons for the emergence of regional parties in India. These are as follows:
1. Cultural and ethnic pluralism of the Indian society.
2. Economic disparities and regional imbalances in the development.
3. Desire of certain sections or areas to maintain separate identity due to historical factors.
4. Self-interest of the deposed Maharajas and dispossessed Zamindars.
5. Failure of national politics to meet the regional aspirations.
6. Reorganisation of states on the basis of language.
7. Charismatic personality of the regional leaders.
8. Factional fights within the larger parties.
9. Centralising tendencies of the congress party.
10. Absence of a strong opposition party at the central level.
11. Role of caste and religion in the political process.
12. Alienation and discontentment among the tribal groups.

ROLE OF REGIONAL PARTIES:
The following points highlight the role played by the regional parties in Indian politics:
1. They have provided better governance and a stable government at the regional level.
2. They have posed a challenge to the one-party dominant system in the country and led to a decline in the domination of the Congress party.
3. They have made a strong impact on the nature and course of centre-state relations. The tension areas in centre-state relations and the demand for grant of greater autonomy made the central leadership more responsive to the needs of the regional actors.
4. They have made politics more competitive and popular participation in the political process more extensive at the grass roots.
5. They have widened the choice for voters in both the parliamentary and assembly elections. The voters can vote for that party which aims to promote the interest of their state/region.
6. They have increased the political consciousness of the people and also their interest in politics. They bring into focus the local or regional issues which immediately attract the attention of the masses.
7. They provided a check against the dictatorial tendencies of the central government. They opposed the ruling congress party at the centre on certain issues and forced the dominant party to be more reasonable in its approach to the process of conflict resolution.
8. They have made a significant contribution for the successful functioning of parliamentary democracy. In a parliamentary democracy, the minority must have its say, the majority must have its way, and the regional parties have played this role successfully by being ruling parties in some states and opposition parties at the centre.
9. The have succeeded in exposing the partisan role of the Governors in the appointment and dismissal of the Chief Minister, in issuing of ordinances and reservation of bills for the consideration of the President.
10. After the dawn of the era of coalition politics, the regional parties have assumed an important role in national politics. The have joined the coalition governments formed at the centre and shared power with the national parties.

DYSFUNCTIONS OF REGIONAL PARTIES:
However, there are also negative points in the role of regional parties. These are as follows:
1. They have given more importance to regional interests rather than national interests. They have neglected the implications and consequences of their narrow approach to the resolution of national issues.
2. They have encouraged regionalism, cas-teism, linguism, communalism and tribalism which have become hurdles to national integration.
3. They are responsible for the unresolution of the inter-state water disputes, inter-state border disputes and other interstate issues.
4. They have also indulged in corruption, nepotism, favouritism and other forms of misutilisation of power in order to promote their self-interest.
5. They have focused more on the populist schemes and measures to expand and strengthen their electoral base. This has adversely affected the state economy and development.
6. They bring in regional factor in the decision-making and the policy-making by the coalition government at the centre. They force the central leadership to yield to their demands.

Elections:
ELECTORAL SYSTEM:
Articles 324 to 329 in Part XV of the Constitution make the following provisions with regard to the electoral system in our country:
1. The Constitution (Article 324) provides for an independent Election Commission in order to ensure free and fair elections in the country. The power of superintendence, direction and conduct of elections to the Parliament, the state legislatures, the office of the President and the office of the VicePresident is vested in the Commission1. At present, the commission consists of a chief election commissioner and two election commissioners.
2. There is to be only one general electoral roll for every territorial constituency for election to the Parliament and the state legislatures. Thus, the Constitution has abolished the system of communal representation and separate electorates which led to the partition of the country.
3. No person is to be ineligible for inclusion in the electoral roll on grounds only of religion, race, caste, sex or any of them. Further, no person can claim to be included in any special electoral roll for any constituency on grounds only of religion, race, caste or sex or any of them. Thus, the Constitution has accorded equality to every citizen in the matter of electoral franchise.
4. The elections to the Lok Sabha and the state assemblies are to be on the basis of adult franchise. Thus, every person who is a citizen of India and who is 183 years of age, is entitled to vote at the election provided he is not disqualified under the provisions of the Constitution or any law made by the appropriate legislature (Parliament or state legislature) on the ground of non-residence, unsound mind, crime or corrupt or illegal practice.
5. Parliament may make provision with respect to all matters relating to elections to the Parliament and the state legislatures including the preparation of electoral rolls, the delimitation of constituencies and all other matters necessary for securing their due constitution.
6. The state legislatures can also make provision with respect to all matters relating to elections to the state legislatures including the preparation of electoral rolls and all other matters necessary for securing their due constitution. But, they can make provision for only those matters which are not covered by the Parliament. In other words, they can only supplement the parliamentary law and cannot override it.
7. The Constitution declares that the validity of any law relating to the delimitation of constituencies or the allotment of seats to such constituencies cannot be questioned in any court. Consequently, the orders issued by the Delimitation Commission become final and cannot be challenged in any court.
8. The Constitution lays down that no election to the Parliament or the state legislature is to be questioned except by an election petition presented to such authority and in such manner as provided by the appropriate legislature. Since 1966, the election petitions are triable by high courts alone. But, the appellate jurisdiction lies with the Supreme Court alone.
Article 323B empowers the appropriate legislature (Parliament or state legislature) to establish a tribunal for the adjudication of election disputes. It also provides for the exclusion of the jurisdiction of all courts (except the special leave appeal jurisdiction of the Supreme Court) in such disputes. So far, no such tribunal has been established. It must be noted here that in Chandra Kumar case5 (1997), the Supreme Court declared this provision as unconstitutional. Consequently, if at any time an election tribunal is established, an appeal from its decision lies to the high court.

ELECTION MACHINERY:
Election Commission of India (ECI):
Under Article 324 of the Constitution of India, the Election Commission of India is vested with the power of superintendence, direction and control of conducting the elections to the Lok Sabha and State Legislative Assemblies. The Election Commission of India is a three-member body, with one Chief Election Commissioner and two Election Commissioners. The President of India appoints the Chief Election Commissioner and the Election Commissioners.

Chief Electoral Officer (CEO):
The Chief Electoral Officer of a state/ Union Territory is authorised to supervise the election work in the state/Union Territory subject to the overall superintendence, direction and control of the Election Commission. The Election Commission of India nominates or designates an Officer of the Government of the state / Union Territory as the Chief Electoral Officer in consultation with that State Government / Union Territory Administration.

District Election Officer (DEO):
Subject to the superintendence, direction and control of the Chief Electoral Officer, the District Election Officer supervises the election work of a district. The Election Commission of India nominates or designates an officer of the state Government as the District Election Officer in consultation with the state government.

Returning Officer (RO):
The Returning Officer of a Parliamentary or assembly constituency is responsible for the conduct of elections in the Parliamentary or assembly constituency concerned. The Election Commission of India nominates or designates an officer of the Government or a local authority as the Returning Officer for each of the assembly and parliamentary constituencies in consultation with the State Government / Union Territory Administration. In addition, the Election Commission of India also appoints one or more Assistant Returning Officers for each of the assembly and Parliamentary constituencies to assist the Returning Officer in the performance of his functions in connection with the conduct of elections.

Electoral Registration Officer (ERO):
The Electoral Registration Officer is responsible for the preparation of electoral rolls for a Parliamentary / assembly constituency. The Election Commission of India, in consultation with the state / UT government, appoints an officer of the government or the local authorities as the Electoral Registration Officer. In addition, the Election Commission of India also appoints one or more Assistant Electoral Registration Officers to assist the Electoral Registration Officer in the performance of his functions in the matter of preparation / revision of electoral rolls.

Presiding Officer:
The Presiding Officer with the assistance of polling officers conducts the poll at a polling station. The District Election Officer appoints the Presiding Officers and the Polling Officers. In the case of Union Territories, such appointments are made by the Returning Officers.

Observers:
The Election Commission of India nominates officers of Government as Observers for Parliamentary and Assembly Constituencies. These observers are of various kinds:
1. General Observers: The Commission deploys General Observers in adequate number to ensure smooth conduct of elections. These Observers are asked to keep a close watch on every stage of the electoral process to ensure free and fair elections.
2. Expenditure Observers: Expenditure Observers from Central Government Services are appointed to keep a close watch on election expenditure of the candidates and to ensure that no inducement is offered to the electors during the entire election process for exercise of their franchise.
3. Police Observers: The Commission deploys IPS officers as Police Observers at State and District levels, depending upon the sensitivity of the Constituency, wherever required. They monitors all activities relating to force deployment, law and order situation and co-ordinate between the Civil and Police administration to ensure free and fair election.
4. Awareness Observers: For the first time in the 16th Lok Sabha Elections (2014), the Commission deployed Central Awareness Observers to oversee the efficient and effective management of the electoral process at the field level, mainly in respect of voter awareness and facilitation. Awareness Observers are deployed to observe the interventions undertaken by the election machinery to bridge the gap in people’s participation in the electoral process particularly in regard to voters’ turnout. They also monitors the various media related aspects of RP Act 1951 and observe the mechanism directed by the Commission at District levels on checking the problem of ‘Paid News’.
5. Micro Observers: In addition to General Observers, the Commission also deploys Micro Observers to observe the poll proceedings on the poll day in selected critical polling stations. They are chosen from Central Government / Central PSUs officials. Micro-Observers verify the BMF at the Polling stations and certify the same before start of polling. They observe the proceedings at the Polling Stations on the poll day right from the mock poll to the completion of poll and the process of sealing of EVMs and other documents to ensure that all instructions of the Commission are complied with by the Polling Parties and the Polling Agents. They also report to the General Observers directly about vitiation of the poll proceedings, if any, in their allotted Polling Stations.
6. Assistant Expenditure Observers: In addition to Expenditure Observers, Assistant Expenditure Observers are appointed for each Assembly segment to ensure that all major election campaign events are videographed and complaints of electoral malpractices are promptly attended.

ELECTION PROCESS:
Time of Elections:
Elections for the Lok Sabha and every state Legislative Assembly have to take place every five years, unless called earlier. The President can dissolve Lok Sabha and call a General Election before five years is up, if the Government can no longer command the confidence of the Lok Sabha, and if there is no alternative government available to take over.

Schedule of Elections:
When the five-year limit is up, or the legislature has been dissolved and new elections have been called, the Election Commission puts into effect the machinery for holding an election. The Constitution states that there can be no longer than six months between the last session of the dissolved Lok Sabha and the recalling of the new House, so elections have to be concluded before then.
The Commission normally announces the schedule of elections in a major press conference a few weeks before the formal process is set in motion. The Model Code of Conduct for guidance of candidates and political parties comes immediately into effect after such announcement.
The formal process for the elections starts with the Notification or Notifications calling upon the electorate to elect Members of a House. As soon as Notifications are issued, candidates can start filing their nominations in the constituencies from where they wish to contest. These are scrutinised by the Returning Officer of the constituency concerned after the last date for the same is over after about a week. The validly nominated candidates can withdraw from the contest within two days from the date of scrutiny. Contesting candidates get at least two weeks for political campaign before the actual date of poll.
On account of the vast magnitude of operations and the massive size of the electorate, polling is held on a number of days for the national elections. A separate date for counting is fixed and the results declared for each constituency by the concerned Returning Officer.
The Commission compiles the complete list of members elected and issues an appropriate Notification for the due constitution of the House. With this, the process of elections is complete and the President, in case of the Lok Sabha, and the Governors of the concerned states, in case of State Assemblies, can then convene their respective Houses to hold their sessions.

Oath or Affirmation:
It is necessary for a candidate to make and subscribe an oath or affirmation before an officer authorised by the Election Commission. For any particular election, the authorised persons are, principally, the Returning Officer and the Assistant Returning Officer for the constituency. In the case of a candidate confined in a prison or under preventive detention, the superintendent of the prison or commandant of the detention camp in which he is so confined or is under such detention is authorised to administer the oath. And in the case of a candidate confined to bed in a hospital or elsewhere owing to illness or any other cause, the medical superintendent in charge of the hospital or the medical practitioner attending on him is similarly authorised. If a candidate is outside India, the Indian Ambassador or High Commissioner or diplomatic consular authorised by him can also administer oath/affirmation. The candidate, in person, is required to make the oath or affirmation immediately after presenting his nomination papers and in any case not later than the day previous to the date of the scrutiny.

Election Campaign:
The campaign is the period when the political parties put forward their candidates and arguments with which they hope to persuade people to vote for their candidates and parties. Candidates are given a week to put forward their nominations. These are scrutinised by the Returning Officers and if not found to be in order can be rejected after a summary hearing. Validly nominated candidates can withdraw within two days after nominations have been scrutinised. The official campaign lasts at least two weeks from the drawing up of the list of nominated candidates, and officially ends 48 hours before polling closes.
During the election campaign, the political parties and contesting candidates are expected to abide by a Model Code of Conduct evolved by the Election Commission on the basis of a consensus among political parties. The model code lays down broad guidelines as to how the political parties and candidates should conduct themselves during the election campaign. It is intended to maintain the election campaign on healthy lines, avoid clashes and conflicts between political parties or their supporters and to ensure peace and order during the campaign period and thereafter, until the results are declared. The model code also prescribes guidelines for the ruling party either at the Centre or in the state to ensure that a level field is maintained and that no cause is given for any complaint that the ruling party has used its official position for the purposes of its election campaign.
Once an election has been called, parties issue manifestos detailing the programmes they wish to implement if elected to government, the strengths of their leaders, and the failures of opposing parties and their leaders. Slogans are used to popularise and identify parties and issues, and pamphlets and posters distributed to the electorate. Rallies and meetings where the candidates try to persuade, cajole and enthuse supporters, and denigrate opponents, are held throughout the constituencies. Personal appeals and promises of reform are made, with candidates travelling the length and breadth of the constituency to try to influence as many potential supporters as possible.

Polling Days:
Polling is normally held on a number of different days in different constituencies, to enable the security forces and those monitoring the election to keep law and order and ensure that voting during the election is fair.

Ballot Papers and Symbols:
After nomination of candidates is complete, a list of competing candidates is prepared by the Returning Officer, and ballot papers are printed. Ballot papers are printed with the names of the candidates (in languages set by the Election Commission) and the symbols allotted to each of the candidates. Candidates of recognised parties are allotted their party symbols.

Voting Procedure:
Voting is by secret ballot. Polling stations are usually set up in public institutions, such as schools and community halls. To enable as many electors as possible to vote, the officials of the Election Commission try to ensure that there is a polling station within two kilometres of every voter, and that no polling stations should have to deal with more than 1500 voters. Each polling station is open for at least eight hours on the day of the election. On entering the polling station, the elector is checked against the electoral roll, and allocated a ballot paper. The elector votes by marking the ballot paper with a rubber stamp on or near the symbol of the candidate of his choice, inside a screened compartment in the polling station. The voter then folds the ballot paper and inserts it in a common ballot box which is kept in full view of the Presiding Officer and polling agents of the candidates. This marking system eliminates the possibility of ballot papers being surreptitiously taken out of the polling station or not being put in the ballot box.
Since 1998, the Commission has increasingly used Electronic Voting Machines (EMVs) instead of ballot boxes. In 2003, all state elections and by elections were held using EVMs. Encouraged by this, the Commission took a historic decision to use only EVMs for the Lok Sabha election in 2004. More than 1 million EVMs were used in this election.

Electronic Voting Machine (EVM):
An Electronic Voting Machine (EVM) is a simple electronic device used to record votes in place of ballot papers and boxes which were used earlier in conventional voting system. The advantages of the EVM over the traditional ballot paper / ballot box system are given here:
(i) It eliminates the possibility of invalid and doubtful votes which, in many cases, are the root causes of controversies and election petitions.
(ii) It makes the process of counting of votes much faster than the conventional system.
(iii) It reduces to a great extent the quantity of paper used thus saving a large number of trees making the process ecofriendly.
(iv) It reduces cost of printing (almost nil) as only one sheet of ballot paper is required for each Polling Station.

Supervising Elections:
The Election Commission appoints a large number of Observers to ensure that the campaign is conducted fairly, and that people are free to vote as they choose. Election expenditure Observers keeps a check on the amount that each candidate and party spends on the election.

Counting of Votes:
After the polling has finished, the votes are counted under the supervision of Returning Officers and Observers appointed by the Election Commission. After the counting of votes is over, the Returning Officer declares the name of the candidate, to whom the largest number of votes have been given, as the winner and as having been returned by the constituency to the concerned House.
Elections to the Lok Sabha are carried out using a first-pastthe-post electoral system. The country is split up into separate geographical areas, known as constituencies, and the electors can cast one vote each for a candidate, the winner being the candidate who gets the maximum votes.
Elections to the State Assemblies are carried out in the same manner as for the Lok Sabha election, with the states and union territories divided into single-member constituencies, and the firstpast-the-post electoral system used.

Media Coverage:
In order to bring as much transparency as possible to the electoral process, the media are encouraged and provided with facilities to cover the election, although subject to maintaining the secrecy of the vote. Media persons are given special passes to enter polling stations to cover the poll process and the counting halls during the actual counting of votes.

Election Petitions:
Any elector or candidate can file an election petition if he or she thinks there has been malpractice during the election. An election petition is not an ordinary civil suit, but treated as a contest in which the whole constituency is involved. Election petitions are tried by the High Court of the state involved, and if upheld can even lead to the restaging of the election in that constituency.

There were 14 recognised parties on all-India basis during 1952 elections. After the first general election, 4 parties were recognized as national parties (Indian National Congress, Praja Socialist Party, Communist Party of India and All India Bhartiya Jan Sangh) in 1953.

Election Laws:
REPRESENTATION OF THE PEOPLE ACT, 1950:
Articles 81 and 170 of the Constitution of India lay down the maximum number of seats in Parliament and in Legislative Assemblies of States and also certain principles to be followed in allocating seats in the House of People among the States and in the State Legislative Assemblies, but have left the actual allocation of such seats to be provided by the law.
Similarly, Article 171 of the Constitution of India lays down the maximum and minimum number of seats in the Legislative Council of a State, and also specify the various methods in which the seats shall be filled, but the actual number of seats to be filled by each such method has been left to be provided by law.
Therefore, the Representation of the People Act, 1950, was enacted to provide for the allocation of seats in the House of the People and in the Legislative Assemblies and Legislative Councils of States.
The Act also sought to confer on the President the powers to delimit, after consultation with the Election Commission, the various constituencies for the purpose of elections to fill seats in the House of the People and in the Legislative Assemblies and Legislative Councils of States.
The Act further provided for the registration of electors for Parliamentary Constituencies and for the Assembly and Council Constituencies, and the qualifications and disqualifications for such registration.
To sum-up, the Act makes the following provisions relating to the elections:
1. Allocation of seats in the House of the People, the State Legislative Assemblies and the State Legislative Councils.
2. Delimitation of Parliamentary, Assembly and Council Constituencies.
3. Election officers like chief electoral officers, district election officers, electoral registration officers and so on.
4. Electoral rolls for Parliamentary, Assembly and Council constituencies.
5. Manner of filling seats in the Council of States to be filled by representatives of union territories.
6. Local authorities for purposes of elections to the State Legislative Councils.
7. Barring the jurisdiction of civil courts.

REPRESENTATION OF THE PEOPLE ACT, 1951:
The Representation of the People Act, 1950 did not contain all the provisions relating to elections but merely provided for the allocation of seats in and the delimitation of constituencies for the purpose of elections to the House of People and Legislatures of States, the qualifications of voter at such election and the preparations of electoral rolls.
The provisions for the actual conduct of elections to the Houses of Parliament and to the House or Houses of the Legislature of each State, the qualifications and disqualifications for the membership of these Houses, the corrupt practices and other election offences, and the decision of election disputes were all left to be made in a subsequent measure. In order to provide for these provisions, the Representation of the People Act, 1951 was enacted.
Broadly speaking, this Act contains provisions relating to the following electoral matters:
1. Qualifications and disqualifications for membership of Parliament and State Legislatures
2. Notification of general elections
3. Administrative machinery for the conduct of elections
4. Registration of political parties
5. Conduct of elections
6. Free supply of certain material to candidates of recognised political parties
7. Disputes regarding elections
8. Corrupt practices and electoral offences
9. Powers of Election Commission in connection with inquiries as to disqualifications of members.
10. Bye-elections and time limit for filling vacancies.
11. Miscellaneous provisions relating to elections.
12. Barring the jurisdiction of civil courts.

The conduct of elections include the following matters:
(a) Nomination of candidates
(b) Candidates and their agents
(c) General procedure at elections
(d) The poll
(e) Counting of votes
(f) Multiple elections
(g) Publication of election results and nominations
(h) Declaration of assets and liabilities
(i) Election expenses

The provisions of the Act with respect to disputes regarding elections are related to the following matters:
(i) Presentation of election petitions to High Court
(ii) Trial of election petitions
(iii) Withdrawal and abatement of election petitions
(iv) Appeals to Supreme Court
(v) Costs and security for costs

DELIMITATION ACT, 2002:
Articles 82 and 170 of the Constitution of India provide for readjustment and the division of each State into territorial constituencies (Parliamentary constituencies and Assembly constituencies) on the basis of the 2001 census by such authority and in such manner as Parliament may, by law, determine. Further, Articles 330 and 332 of the Constitution of India provide for re-fixing the number of seats reserved for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes in the House of the People and Legislative Assemblies of the States on the basis of the 2001 census.
The present delimitation of Parliamentary and Assembly constituencies is based on the 1971 census. The uneven growth of population in different constituencies in different parts of the country as well as within the same State as also continuous migration of people / electorate from one place to other especially from rural areas to urban areas have resulted in strikingly differing sizes of electoral constituencies even within the same State.
Therefore, the Delimitation Act, 20021 , was enacted to set up a Delimitation Commission for the purpose of effecting delimitation on the basis of the 2001 census so as to correct the aforesaid distortion in the sizes of electoral constituencies. The proposed Delimitation Commission would also re-fix the number of seats for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes on the basis of the 2001 census, without affecting total number of seats based on the 1971 census.
The Act sought to lay down certain guidelines as to the manner in which such delimitation would be undertaken. In the Act, the new Delimitation Commission was given the task of carrying out delimitation of Parliamentary and Assembly constituencies. It had been specifically provided that the Delimitation Commission shall endeavour to complete the work within a period not later than July 31, 2008.
The proposed delimitation would apply to every general election to the House of the People or to a State Legislative Assembly held after the final orders of the Commission are published and to every bye-election arising from such general election.

OTHER ACTS RELATING TO ELECTIONS:
1. Parliament (Prevention of Disqualification) Act, 19594 declares that certain offices of profit under the Government shall not disqualify the holders thereof for being chosen as (or for being) members of Parliament.
2. Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes Orders (Amendment) Act, 1976 provides for the inclusion in, and the exclusion from, the lists of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes, of certain castes and tribes, for the readjustment of representation of parliamentary and assembly constituencies.
3. Government of Union Territories Act, 1963.
4. Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi Act, 1991.
5. Presidential and Vice-Presidential Elections Act, 19525 regulates certain matters relating to or connected with elections to the offices of the President and Vice-President of India.

RULES RELATING TO ELECTIONS:
1. Registration of electors Rules, 19606 provide for the preparation and publication of electoral rolls.
2. Conduct of Elections Rules, 19617 facilitates conduct of fair and free elections to the Parliament and State Legislatures.
3. Prohibition of Simultaneous Membership Rules, 1950.
4. Members of Lok Sabha (Disqualification on Ground of Defection) Rules, 1985.
5. Members of Rajya Sabha (Disqualification on Ground of Defection) Rules, 1985.
6. Presidential and Vice-Presidential Elections Rules, 1974.
7. Members of Lok Sabha (Declaration of Assets and Liabilities) Rules, 2004.
8. Members of Rajya Sabha (Declaration of Assets and Liabilities) Rules, 2004.

ORDERS RELATING TO ELECTIONS:
1. Election Symbols (Reservation and Allotment) Order, 1968 provides for the specification, reservation, choice and allotment of symbols at elections in parliamentary and assembly constituencies, for the recognition of political parties in relation thereto.
2. Registration of Political Parties (Furnishing of Additional Particulars) Order, 1992 provides for furnishing of additional particulars by associations or bodies of individual citizens of India seeking registration as a political party with the Election Commission of India.

Electoral Reforms:
COMMITTEES RELATED TO ELECTORAL REFORMS:
The various committees and commissions which have examined our electoral system, election machinery as well as election process and suggested reforms are mentioned here.
1. Joint Parliamentary Committee on Amendments to Election Laws (1971–72).
2. Tarkunde Committee was appointed in 1974 by Jaya Prakash Narayan (JP) during his “Total Revolution” movement. This unofficial committee submitted its report in 1975.
3. Dinesh Goswami Committee on Electoral Reforms (1990) 
4. Vohra Committee on the Nexus between Crime and Politics (1993)
5. Election Commission of India Recommendations on Electoral Reforms (1998).
6. Indrajit Gupta Committee on State Funding of Elections (1998)
7. Law Commission of India 170th Report on Reform of the Electoral Laws (1999)
8. National Commission to Review the Working of the Constitution (2000–2002)3. It was headed by M.N. Venkatachaliah.
9. Election Commission of India Report on Proposed Electoral Reforms (2004).
10. Second Administrative Reforms Commission of India Report on Ethics in Governance (2007). It was headed by Veerappa Moily.
11. Tankha Committee (Core Committee) was appointed in 2010 to look into the whole gamut of the election laws and electoral reforms.
12. J.S. Verma Committee Report on Amendments to Criminal Law (2013).
13. Law Commission of India 244th Report on Electoral Disqualifications (2014).
14. Law Commission of India 255th Report on Electoral Reforms (2015).
Based on the recommendations made by the above Committees and Commissions, various reforms have been introduced in our electoral system, election machinery and election process. These can be studied under the following four heads.
• Electoral reforms before 1996
• Electoral reforms of 1996
• Electoral reforms after 1996
• Electoral reforms since 2010

ELECTORAL REFORMS BEFORE 1996:
Lowering of Voting Age:
The 61st Constitutional Amendment Act of 19884 reduced the voting age from 21 years to 18 years for the Lok Sabha as well as the assembly elections. This was done in order to provide to the unrepresented youth of the country an opportunity to express their feelings and help them become a part of political process.

Deputation to Election Commission:
In 1988 , a provision was made that the officers and the staff engaged in preparation, revision and correction of electoral rolls for elections are deemed to be on deputation to the Election Commission for the period of such employment. These personnel, during that period, would be under the control, superintendence and discipline of the Election Commission.

Increase in Number of Proposers
In 1988, the number of electors who are required to sign as proposers in nomination papers for elections to the Rajya Sabha and state legislative council has been increased to 10 per cent of the electors of the constituency or ten such electors, whichever is less. This was done in order to prevent non-serious candidates from contesting frivolously.

Electronic Voting Machines (EVM):
In 1989 , a provision was made to facilitate the use of Electronic Voting Machines (EVMs) in elections. The EVMs were used for the first time in 1998 on experimental basis in selected constituencies in the elections to the Assemblies of Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh and Delhi. The EVMs were used for the first time in the general elections (entire state) to the Assembly of Goa in 1999.

Booth Capturing:
In 1989, a provision was made for adjournment of poll or countermanding of elections in case of booth capturing. Booth capturing includes: 
(i) seizure of a polling station and making polling authorities surrender ballot papers or voting machines 
(ii) taking possession of polling station and allowing only one’s own supporters to exercise their franchise 
(iii) threatening and preventing any elector from going to polling station and 
(iv) seizure of the place being used for counting of votes.

Elector’s Photo Identity Card (EPIC):
The use of electors’ photo identity cards by the Election Commission is surely making the electoral process simple, smoother and quicker. A decision was taken by the Election Commission in 1993 to issue photo identity cards to electors throughout the country to check bogus voting and impersonation of electors at elections. The electoral roll is the basis for issue of EPICs to the registered electors. The electoral rolls are normally revised every year with 1st January of the year as the qualifying date. Every Indian citizen who attain the age of 18 years or above as on that date is eligible for inclusion in the electoral roll and can apply for the same. Once he is registered in the roll, he would be eligible for getting an EPIC. The scheme of issuing the EPICs is, therefore, a continuous and ongoing process for the completion of which no time limit can be fixed as the registration of electors is a continuous and ongoing process (excepting for a brief period between the last date for filing nomination and completion of electoral process) on account of more number of persons becoming eligible for the right of franchise on attaining the age of 18. It is the continuous effort of the Election Commission to provide the EPICs to the electors who have been left out in the previous campaigns as well as the new electors.

ELECTORAL REFORMS OF 1996:
In 1990, the National Front Government headed by V.P. Singh appointed a committee on electoral reforms under the chairmanship of Dinesh Goswami, the then Law Minister. The Committee was asked to study the electoral system in detail and suggest measures for remedying the drawbacks within it. The Committee, in its report submitted in 1990 itself, made a number of proposals on electoral reforms. Some of these recommendations were implemented in 19969.

Listing of Names of Candidates:
The candidates contesting elections are to be classified into three categories for the purpose of listing of their names. They are
(i) Candidates of recognised political parties
(ii) Candidates of registered-unrecognised political parties
(iii) Other (independent) candidates
Their names in the list of contesting candidates and in the ballot papers has to appear separately in the above order and in each category these have to be arranged in the alphabetical order. Disqualification for Insulting the National Honour Act
A person who is convicted for the following offences under the Prevention of Insults to National Honour Act of 1971 is disqualified to contest in the elections to the Parliament and state legislature for 6 years.
(i) Offence of insulting the National Flag
(ii) Offence of insulting the Constitution of India
(iii) Offence of preventing the singing of National Anthem

Prohibition on the Sale of Liquor:
No liquor or other intoxicants are to be sold or given or distributed at any shop, eating place, hotel or any other place whether public or private within a polling area during the period of 48 hours ending with the hour fixed for the conclusion of poll. Any person who violates this rule is to be punished with imprisonment up to 6 months or with fine up to Rs. 2,000 or with both.

Number of Proposers:
The nomination of a candidate in a Parliamentary or assembly constituency should be subscribed by 10 registered electors of the constituency as proposers, if the candidate is not sponsored by a recognised political party. In the case of a candidate sponsored by a recognised political party, only one proposer is required. This was done in order to discourage non-serious people from contesting the elections. 
Death of a Candidate:
Earlier, in case of death of a contesting candidate before the actual polling, the election used to be countermanded. Consequently, the election process had to start all over again in the concerned constituency. But now, the election would not be countermanded on the death of a contesting candidate before the actual polling. However, if the deceased candidate belonged to a recognised political party, the party concerned would be given an option to propose another candidate within seven days.

Time Limit for By-Elections:
Now, by-elections are to be held within six months of occurrence of the vacancy in any House of Parliament or a state legislature. But, this condition is not applicable in two cases:
(i) Where the remainder of the term of the member whose vacancy is to be filled is less than one year; or
(ii) When the Election Commission in consultation with the Central Government, certifies that it is difficult to hold the byelections within the said period.

Holiday to Employees on the Polling Day:
The registered voters employed in any trade, business, industry or any other establishment are entitled to a paid holiday on the polling day. This rule applies even to the daily wagers. Any employer who violates this rule is to be punished with a fine up to Rs. 500. However, this rule is not applicable in the case of a voter whose absence may cause danger or substantial loss in respect of the employment in which he is engaged.

Contestants Restricted to Two Constituencies:
A candidate would not be eligible to contest from more than two Parliamentary or assembly constituencies at a general election or at the by-elections which are held simultaneously. Similar restrictions are imposed for biennial elections and by-elections to the Rajya Sabha and the state legislative councils.

Prohibition of Arms:
Entering into the neighbourhood of a polling station with any kind of arms is to be considered a cognizable offence. Such an act is punishable with imprisonment of up to two years or with fine or with both. Further, the arms found in possession of the offender are to be confiscated and the related licence is to be cancelled. But, these provisions are not applicable to the returning officer, presiding officer, any police officer or any other person appointed to maintain peace and order at the polling station. Effective Campaigning Period Reduced The minimum gap between the last date for withdrawal of candidature and the polling date has been reduced from 20 to 14 days.

ELECTORAL REFORMS AFTER 1996:
Presidential and Vice Presidential Elections In 1997, the number of electors as proposers and seconders for contesting election to the office of the President was increased from 10 to 50 and to the office of the Vice President from 5 to 20. Further, the amount of security deposit was increased from Rs. 2,500 to Rs. 15,000 for contesting election to both the offices of President and Vice-President to discourage frivolous candidates.

Requisitioning of Staff for Election Duty:
In 1998, a provision was made whereby the employees of local authorities, nationalised banks, universities, LIC, government undertakings and other government-aided institutions can be requisitioned for deployment on election duty.

Voting through Postal Ballot:
In 1999, a provision was made for voting by certain classes of persons through postal ballot. Thus, any class of persons can be notified by the Election Commission, in consultation with the government, and the persons belonging to such notified class can give their votes by postal ballot, and not in any other manner, at elections in their constituency or constituencies.

Facility to Opt to Vote Through Proxy:
In 2003, the facility to opt to vote through proxy was provided to the service voters belonging to the Armed Forces and members belonging to a Force to which provisions of the Army Act apply. Such service voters who opt to vote through proxy have to appoint a proxy in a prescribed format and intimate the Returning Officer of the constituency.

Declaration of Criminal Antecedents, Assets, etc., by Candidates:
In 2003, the election Commission issued an order directing every candidate seeking election to the Parliament or a State Legislature to furnish on his nomination paper the information on the following matters.
(i) Whether the candidate has been convicted or acquitted or discharged in any criminal offence in the past? Whether he/she was imprisoned or fined?
(ii) Prior to six months of filing nomination, whether the candidate is accused in any pending case, of any offence punishable with imprisonment for two years or more, and in which charges were framed or cognizance was taken by a court; if so, the details thereof
(iii) The assets (immovable, movable, bank balances, etc.) of a candidate and his/ her spouse and that of dependents
(iv) Liabilities, if any, particularly whether there are any dues of any public financial institution or government dues
(v) The educational qualifications of the candidate Furnishing of any false information in the affidavit is now an electoral offence punishable with imprisonment upto six months or fine or both.

Changes in Rajya Sabha Elections:
In 2003, the following two changes were introduced with respect to elections to the Rajya Sabha:
(i) Domicile or residency requirement of a candidate contesting an election to the Rajya Sabha was removed. Prior to this, a candidate had to be an elector in the state from where he was to be elected. Now, it would be sufficient if he is an elector in any parliamentary constituency in the country.
(ii) Introducing open ballot system, instead of secret ballot system, for elections to the Rajya Sabha. This was done to curb cross-voting and to wipe out the role of money power during Rajya Sabha elections. Under the new system, an elector belonging to a political party has to show the ballot paper after marking his vote to a nominated agent of that political party.

Exemption of Travelling Expenditure:
As per a provision of 2003, the traveling expenditure incurred by the campaigning leaders of a political party shall be exempted from being included in the election expenses of the candidate.

Free Supply of Electoral Rolls, etc.:
According to a 2003 provision, the Government should supply, free of cost, the copies of the electoral rolls and other prescribed material to the candidates of recognised political parties for the Lok Sabha and Assembly elections. Further, the Election Commission should supply specified items to the voters in the constituencies concerned or to the candidates set up by the recognised political parties.

Parties Entitled to Accept Contribution:
In 2003, the political parties were entitled to accept any amount of contribution from any person or company other than a government company. They have to report any contribution in excess of Rs. 20,000 to the Election Commission for making any claim to any income tax relief. Besides, the companies would get income tax exemption on the amount contributed.

Allocation of Time on Electronic Media:
Under a 2003 provision, the Election Commission should allocate equitable sharing of time on the cable television network and other electronic media during elections to display or propagate any matter or to address public. This allocation would be decided on the basis of the past performance of a recognised political party.

Introduction of Braille Signage Features in EVMs:
The Commission received representations from the various associations of visually impaired persons for introduction of Braille signage features in the EVMs to facilitate the visually impaired voters to cast their votes without the help of attendant. The Commission considered the proposal in detail and tried the Braille signage feature in the EVMs during the bye-election to the Asifnagar Assembly Constituency of Andhra Pradesh held in 2004. In 2005, it was tried in one of the constituency during the Assembly elections of Bihar, Jharkhand and Haryana. In 2006, it was tried in one of the constituency of the States of Assam, West Bengal, Tamil Nadu, Puducherry and Kerala during Assembly elections. In 2008, it was tried in all the assembly constituencies of NCT of Delhi during Assembly elections.
The Commission introduced similar Braille signage features on the Electronic Voting Machines during the General Elections to the Fifteenth Lok Sabha (2009) and simultaneous Assembly elections in some States.

ELECTORAL REFORMS SINCE 2010:
Restrictions Imposed on Exit Polls:
According to a 2009 provision, conducting exit polls and publishing results of exist polls would be prohibited during the election to Lok Sabha and State Legislative Assemblies. Thus, no person shall conduct any exit poll and publish or publicise by means of the print or electronic media or disseminate in any other manner, the result of any exit poll during the period notified by the Election Commission in this regard. Further, any person who contravenes this provision shall be punishable with imprisonment of upto two years or with fine or with both.
“Exit-poll” is an opinion survey regarding how electors have voted at an election or how all the electors have performed with regard to the identification of a political party or candidate in an election.

Time-Limit for Submitting a Case for Disqualification: In 2009, a provision was made for the simplification of the procedure for disqualification of a person found guilty of corrupt practices. It provided for a three-month time-limit within which the specified authority will have to submit the case of a person found guilty of corrupt practice to the President for determination of the question of disqualification.

All Officials Included in Corrupt Practice:
In 2009, a provision was made for the inclusion of all officials, whether in the government service or not, appointed or deputed by the Election Commission in connection with the conduct of elections, within the scope of corrupt practice of obtaining any assistance by a candidate for the furtherance of the prospects of his election.

Increase in Security Deposit:
In 2009, the amount of security deposit to be paid by the candidates contesting elections to the Lok Sabha was increased from Rs. 10,000 to Rs. 25,000 for the general candidates and from Rs. 5,000 to Rs. 12,500 for SC and ST candidates. Similarly, the security deposit in the case of elections to the state legislative assembly was increased from Rs. 5,000 to Rs. 10,000 for the general candidates and from Rs. 2,500 to Rs. 5,000 for the SC and ST candidates. This was done in order to check the multiplicity of non-serious candidates.

Appellate Authority within the District:
In 2009, a provision was made for appointment of an appellate authority within the district against the orders of the Electoral Registration Officers, instead of the Chief Electoral Officer of the state. Thus, an appeal against any order of the Electoral Registration Officer of a constituency (during continuous updation of the electoral roll) will now lie before the District Magistrate or Additional District Magistrate or Executive Magistrate or District Collector or an officer of equivalent rank. A further appeal against any order of the District Magistrate or Additional District Magistrate will now lie before the Chief Electoral Officer of the state.

Voting Rights to Citizens of India Living Abroad:
In 2010, a provision was made to confer voting rights to the citizens of India residing outside India due to various reasons. Accordingly, every citizen of India - 
(a) whose name is not included in the electoral roll 
(b) who has not acquired the citizenship of any other country 
(c) who is absent from his place of ordinary residence in India owing to his employment, education or otherwise outside India (whether temporarily or not) - shall be entitled to have his name registered in the electoral roll in the Parliamentary / Assembly constituency in which his place of residence in India as mentioned in his passport is located.

Online Enrolment in the Electoral Roll:
In 2013, a provision was made for online filing of applications for enrolment in the electoral roll. For this purpose, the Central Government, after consulting the Election Commission, made the rules known as the Registration of the Electors (Amendment) Rules, 2013.These rules made certain amendments in the Registration of Electors Rules, 1960.

Introduction of NOTA Option:
According to the directions of Supreme Court, the Election Commission made provision in the ballot papers / EVMs for None of the Above (NOTA) option so that the voters who come to the polling booth and decide not to vote for any of the candidates in the fray, are able to exercise their right not to vote for such candidates while maintaining the secrecy of their ballot. The provision for NOTA has been made since General Election to State Legislative Assemblies of Chhattisgarh, Madhya Pradesh, Mizoram, NCT of Delhi and Rajasthan in 2013 and continued in the General Election to State Legislative Assemblies of Andhra Pradesh, Arunachal Pradesh, Odisha and Sikkim in 2014 along with the General Elections to the Sixteenth Lok Sabha (2014).
The voters polled against the NOTA option are not taken into account for calculating the total valid voters polled by the contesting candidates for the purpose of return of security deposits to candidates. Even if the number of electors opting for NOTA options is more than the number of votes polled by any of the candidates, the candidate who secures the largest number of votes has to be declared elected.
In 2001, the ECI had sent a proposal to the Government to amend the law so as to provide for a neutral vote provision for the electors who did not wish to vote for any of the candidates. In 2004, PUCL (People’s Union for Civil Liberties) filed a petition seeking a direction to provide the necessary provision in ballot papers and EVMs for protection of the right to not vote for any candidate, secretly. The Supreme Court in 2013 held that the ECI may provide for the None of the Above (NOTA) option on EVMs and ballot papers.

Introduction of Voter Verifiable Paper Audit Trail (VVPAT):
The Voter Verifiable Paper Audit Trail is an independent (VVPAT) system attached with the EVMs that allows the voters to verify that their votes are cast as intended. When a vote is cast, a slip is printed and remains exposed through a transparent window for seven seconds, showing the serial number, name and symbol of the candidate. Thereafter, the receipt automatically gets cut and falls into the sealed dropbox of the VVPAT. The system allows a voter to challenge his/her vote on the basis of the paper receipt. As per rules, the Presiding Officer of the polling booth will have to record the dissent of the voter, which would have to be taken into account at the time of counting, if the challenge is found to be false.
The law for using VVPATs was amended in 2013. In 2013, the Supreme Court of India had permitted the ECI to introduce VVPAT in a phased manner, calling it ‘an indispensable requirement of free and fair elections’. The Court had felt that introducing VVPAT would ensure the accuracy of the voting system and also help in manual counting of votes in case of dispute. VVPATs were first used in byeelection to the Noksen Assembly Constituency of Nagaland held in 2013. Thereafter, VVPATs have been used in selected constituencies during every General Election to State Legislative Assemblies. VVPATs were used in eight selected Parliamentary Constituencies in the country in the 2014 Lok Sabha Election. EVMs with VVPAT ensure the accuracy and transparency of the voting system.

Persons in Jail or Police Custody Can Contest Elections:
In 2013, the Supreme Court upheld an order of the Patna High Court declaring that a person who has no right to vote by reason of being in jail or in police custody, is not an elector and is, therefore, not qualified to contest the elections to the Parliament or the State Legislature. In order to negate this order of the Supreme Court, the following two new provisions have been included in the Representation of the People Act, 1951:
(i) The first provision expressly provides that by reason of the prohibition to vote (either due to in jail or in police custody), a person whose name has been entered in the electoral roll shall not cease to be an elector.
(ii) The second provision expressly provides that a Member of Parliament or the State Legislature shall be disqualified only if he is so disqualified under the provisions contained in the Act and on no other ground.
Consequently, the persons in jail or in police custody are allowed to contest the elections.

Immediate Disqualification of Convicted MPs and MLAs:
In 2013, the Supreme Court held that chargesheeted Members of Parliament and MLAs, on conviction for offences, will be immediately disqualified from holding membership of the House without being given three months’ time for appeal, as was the case before.
The concerned Bench of the Court struck down as unconstitutional Section 8 (4) of the Representation of the People Act (1951) that allows convicted lawmakers a three-month period for filing appeal to the higher court and to get a stay of the conviction and sentence. The Bench, however, made it clear that the ruling will be prospective and those who had already filed appeals in various High Courts or the Supreme Court against their convictions would be exempt from it.
The Bench said: “A reading of the two provisions in Articles 102 and 191 of the Constitution would make it abundantly clear that Parliament is to make one law for a person to be disqualified for being chosen as, and for being, a Member of either House of Parliament or Legislative Assembly or Legislative Council of the State. Parliament thus does not have the power under Articles 102 and 191 of the Constitution to make different laws for a person to be disqualified for being chosen as a member and for a person to be disqualified for continuing as a Member of Parliament or the State Legislature.”
The Bench said: “Section 8 (4) of the Act which carves out a saving in the case of sitting members of Parliament or State Legislature from the disqualifications under the Act or which defers the date on which the disqualification will take effect in the case of a sitting member of Parliament or a State Legislature is beyond the powers conferred on Parliament by the Constitution.”
The Bench held: “Looking at the affirmative terms of Articles 102 and 191 of the Constitution, we hold that Parliament has been vested with the powers to make law laying down the same disqualifications for person to be chosen as a member of Parliament or a State Legislature and for a sitting member of a House of Parliament or a House of a State Legislature. We also hold that the provisions of Article 101 and 190 of the Constitution expressly prohibit Parliament to defer the date from which the disqualification will come into effect in case of a sitting member of Parliament or a State Legislature. Parliament, therefore, has exceeded its powers conferred by the Constitution in enacting sub-section (4) of Section 8 of the Act and accordingly sub-section (4) of Section 8 of the Act is ultra vires the Constitution36 .”
In order to nullify the above ruling of the Supreme Court, the Representation of the People (Second Amendment and Validation) Bill, 2013 was introduced in the Parliament. However, the Bill was later withdrawn by the Government.

Ceiling on Election Expenditure:
Increased In 2014, the Central Government raised the maximum ceiling on election expenditure by candidates for a Lok Sabha seat in bigger states to Rs. 70 lakhs (from earlier Rs. 40 lakhs). In other states and union territories, it is Rs. 54 lakhs (from earlier Rs. 16–40 lakhs). Similarly, the limit for an Assembly seat in the bigger states was increased to Rs. 28 lakhs (from earlier Rs. 16 lakhs). In other states and union territories, it is 20 lakhs (from earlier Rs. 8–16 lakhs). 

Photos of Candidates on EVMs and Ballot Papers:
According to an Election Commission order, in any election being held after May 1, 2015, the ballot papers and EVMs will carry the picture of the candidate with his or her name and party symbol to avoid confusion among the electorates in constituencies where namesakes are contesting.
The June 2015 by polls to six seats in five states were the first elections where photographs of candidates were used on ballot papers.
The Commission has noted that there are many cases where candidates with same or similar names contest from the same constituency. Although appropriate suffixes are added to the names of candidates in the event of two or more candidates having same name, the Commission considers that additional measures are required for removing confusion in the minds of electors at the time of voting.
The photograph will appear between the name of the candidate and his or her election symbol. The Commission explained that if a candidate fails to provide the photograph, it “shall not be a ground for the rejection of the nomination of the candidate”. The candidates will now be required to submit their recent photograph, either black and white or coloured, to the election authorities at the time of filing nomination. No uniforms would be allowed and caps and dark glasses have to be avoided.

Ceiling on Cash Donations Lowered:
In 2017 budget, the limit for anonymous cash donations by any individual to a political party has been lowered from Rs. 20,000 to Rs. 2,000. This means that now the political parties cannot receive more than Rs. 2,000 as cash donations. However, they are not required to inform the Election Commission of India the details of persons who donate under Rs. 2,000. They must keep records of persons making above Rs. 2,000 donations.

Cap on Corporate Contributions Lifted:
In 2017 budget, the limit on corporate contributions from 7.5 per cent of the net profit of a company’s past three financial years has been removed. This means that now a company can donate any amount of money to any political party. Further, the obligation of the company to report such donations in its profit and loss account has also been lifted.

Introduction of Electoral Bonds:
In 2018, the central government notified the Electoral Bond Scheme. This scheme was announced in the 2017 budget. It is touted as an alternative to cash donations made to the political parties. It is aimed at bringing clean money and substantial transparency into the system of political funding. The salient features of the scheme are:
(i) The electoral bond means a bond issued in the nature of promissory note which is a bearer banking instrument and does not carry the name of the buyer or payee.
(ii) The electoral bonds may be purchased by a citizen of India or entities incorporated or established in India.
(iii) The electoral bonds can be used for making donations to only those registered political parties which have secured not less than one per cent of the votes polled in the last general election to the Lok Sabha or the State legislative Assembly.
(iv) The electoral bonds can be encashed by an eligible political party only through a bank account with the authorized bank.
(v) The electoral bonds are issued in the denomination of Rs. 1,000, Rs. 10,000, Rs. 1,00,000, Rs. 10,00,000 and Rs. 1,00,00,000.
(vi) The information furnished by the buyer is treated confidential by the authorized bank and is not to be disclosed to any authority for any purposes, except when demanded by a competent court or upon registration of criminal case by any law enforcement agency.

Foreign Funding Allowed:
In 2018 budget, the receiving of foreign funds by the political parties has been allowed. In other words, the political parties can now receive funds from the foreign companies. Accordingly, the Foreign Contribution (Regulation) Act, 2010, has been amended. Under this amendment, the definition of a foreign company has been modified.

Voting Behaviour:
MEANING OF VOTING BEHAVIOUR:
Voting behaviour is also known as electoral behaviour. It is a form of political behaviour. It implies the behaviour of voters in the context of elections in a democratic political system. Voting behaviour (or the study of voting behaviour) is defined in the following way:
Plano and Riggs: “Voting behaviour is a field of study concerned with the ways in which people tend to vote in public elections and the reasons why they vote as they do.”
Gordon Marshall: “The study of voting behaviour invariably focuses on the determinants of why people vote as they do and how they arrive at the decisions they make”.
Oinam Kulabidhu: “Voting behaviour may be defined as the behaviour that explicitly reflects voter’s choices, preferences, alternatives, ideologies, concerns, agreements, and programmes in respect of various issues, questions pertaining to the society and nation”.
Stephen Wasby: “The study of voting behaviour involves an analysis of individual psychological make-up and their relation to political action as well as institutional patterns, such as the communication process and their impact on elections”.

SIGNIFICANCE OF VOTING BEHAVIOUR:
Psephology, a branch of political science, deals with the scientific study of voting behaviour. This is a new term popularised by the American political scientists and political sociologists. The recorded history of voting goes back, at least, to the Greek Polis. The modern world for the study of voting behaviour, psephology, derives from the classical Greek ‘Psephos’, the piece of pottery on which certain votes, mainly about the banishment of those seen as dangerous to the state, were inscribed.
The study of voting behaviour is significant for the following reasons:
1. It helps in comprehending the process of political socialisation.
2. It helps in examining the internalisation of democracy as a value among the elite as well as masses.
3. It emphasises the real impact of revolutionary ballot box.
4. It enables to throw light as to how far the electoral politics continue or break with the past.
5. It helps to measure whether it is modern or primordial in the context of political development.

According to N.G.S. Kini, voting behaviour can be regarded as:
1. A mode of legitimising democratic rule;
2. Instancing “participation” in the political process involving integration into the political community;
3. Instancing an act of decision-making;
4. A role-action involving definite political orientation imbedded in a particular type of political culture; or
5. A direct relation of the individual citizens to the formal government.

DETERMINANTS OF VOTING BEHAVIOUR:
Indian society is highly diversified in nature and composition. Hence, voting behaviour in India is determined or influenced by multiple factors. These several factors can be divided, into two broad categories, namely, socioeconomic factors and political factors. These are explained below:
1. Caste: Caste is an important factor influencing the behaviour of voters. Politicisation of caste and casteism in politics has been a remarkable feature of Indian politics. Rajni Kothari said “Indian politics is casteist, and caste is politi-cised”. While formulating their election strategies, the political parties always take into account the factor of caste.
Paul Brass has very-well explained the role of caste factor in the Indian voting behaviour in the following way: “At the local level, in the country side, by far the most important factor in voting behaviour remains caste solidarity. Large and important castes in a constituency tend to back either a respected member of their caste or a political party with whom their caste members identify. However, local factions and local-state factional alignments that involve intercaste coalitions, are also important factors in influencing voting behaviour”.

2. Religion: Religion is another significant factor which influences the electoral behaviour. Political parties indulge in communal propaganda and exploit the religious sentiments of the voters. The existence of various communal parties has further added to the politicisation of religion. Despite India being a secular nation, no political party ignores the influence of religion in electoral politics.

3. Language: Linguistic considerations of the people influence their voting behaviour. During elections, the political parties arouse the linguistic feelings of the people and try to influence their decision-making. The re-organisation of states (in 1956 and later) on language basis clearly reflects the significance of language factor in Indian politics. The rise of some political parties like DMK in Tamil Nadu and TDP in Andhra Pradesh can be attributed to the linguism.

4. Region: Regionalism and sub-regionalism play an important role in voting behaviour. These parochial feelings of subnationalism led to the emergence and perpetuation of regional parties in various states. These regional parties appeal to the electorate on the ground of regional identities and regional sentiments. Sometimes, the secessionist parties call for the boycott of elections.

5. Personality: The charismatic personality of the party leader plays an important role in electoral behaviour. Thus, the towering image of Jawaharlal Nehru, Indira Gandhi, Rajiv Gandhi, Jay Prakash Narayan, Atal Bihari Vajpayee and Narendra Modi has significantly influenced the electorate to vote in favour of their parties. Similarly, at the state level also, the charismatic personality of the regional party leader has been a significant factor of popular support in the elections.

6. Money: The role of money factor cannot be overlooked in explaining the voting behaviour. Despite the limitations on the election expenditures, crores of rupees are spent on elections. The voters seek money or liquor or goods in return for their votes. In other words, ‘votes’ are freely exchanged for ‘notes’. However, money can influence the decisions of the voters only in the normal circumstances and not in a wave election. Paul Brass has very-well explained the meaning of a wave election in the following way: “A wave election is one in which a clear tendency begins to develop among the electorate in a single direction and in favour of a national party or its leader. It is based upon an issue or set of issues that transcend local calculations and coalition and draws the bulk of the uncommitted and wavering voters in the same direction as the word spreads from village to village and tea stall to tea stall”.

7. Performance of the Ruling Party: On the eve of elections, every political party releases its election manifesto containing the promises made by it to the electorate. The performance of the ruling party is judged by the electorate on the basis of its election manifesto. The defeat of Congress Party in 1977 elections and that of Janata Party in 1980 elections illustrates that the performance of the ruling party influences the voting behaviour. Thus, the anti-incumbency factor (which means dissatisfaction with the performance of the ruling party) is a determinant of electoral behaviour.

8. Party Identification: Personal and emotional association with political parties plays a role in determining voting behaviour. People who identify themselves with a particular party will always vote for that party irrespective of its omissions and commissions. Party identification was especially strong in the 1950s and 1960s. However, since the 1970s, there has been a decline in the number of strong party identifiers.

9. Ideology: The political ideology professed by a political party has a bearing on the decision-making of the voters. Some people in the society are committed to certain ideologies like communism, capitalism, democracy, secularism, patriotism, decentralisation and so on. Such people generally support the candidates put up by the parties professing those ideologies. However, it must be printed out here that the number of such people is low.

10. Other Factors: In addition to the aboveexplained factors, there are also various other factors which determine the voting behaviour of the Indian electorate. These are mentioned below:
(i) Political events preceding an election like war, murder of leader, corruption scandals, etc.
(ii) Economic conditions at the time of election like inflation, shortage, unemployment, etc.
(iii) Factionalism - a feature of Indian politics from bottom to top levels
(iv) Age - old or young
(v) Sex - men or women
(vi) Education - educated or uneducated
(vii) Habitation - rural or urban 
(viii) Class (income) - rich or poor
(ix) Family and kinship
(x) Candidate orientation
(xi) Election campaign
(xii) Political family background
(xiii) Role of media

ROLE OF MEDIA IN ELECTIONS AND VOTING BEHAVIOUR:
1. Information Dissemination:
Information dissemination in relation to elections, particularly during the process of elections is extremely important for all stakeholders. Starting from the announcement of elections to nomination, scrutiny, campaign, security arrangements, polling, counting, declaration of results, etc., all of these require widest circulation. The voter comes to know about the basics like: what, when, where and how of elections generally through the media. Even last minute changes of polling arrangements, violation of Model Code of Conduct (MCC), and violation of expenditure instructions, any untoward incidents or disturbances promptly come to the notice not only of the people but also of the Election Commission through the media.
Newspapers and news channels have very enthusiastically made use of the information relating to educational, financial and criminal antecedents of candidates, contained in the affidavit filed by them along with their nomination paper, which is immediately uploaded on the Election Commission’s website. This has contributed to further honesty and transparency in the election system.

2. Enforcement of MCC and other Laws:
In today’s democratic and political landscape, the watch-dog role of the media is quite vital. Media can highlight incidents of use of muscle and money power by political parties or candidates and educate the electors on ethical and inducement-free voting practices.
It can also expose violations of the MCC such as divisive or hate speeches or unverified allegations in campaigns aimed at influencing electors. Violations reported by media are followed up by the Election Commission as in dealing with formal complaints.
The media can sensitise the political functionaries and the electorate about the MCC and relevant laws and instructions governing the conduct of elections.

3. Compliance to Election Laws:
The Election Commission does not regulate media. It has however, the responsibility to enforce the provisions of law or Court directions, which might have linkages with media or certain aspects of media functioning. During elections, media is present and active at all stages which would also mean that they too conform to various laws governing the elections. These laws are mentioned below:
(i) Section 126 of the Representation of the People Act, 1951: It prohibits displaying any election matter by mean of cinematograph, television or other similar apparatus, during the period of 48 hours ending with the hour fixed for conclusion of poll.
(ii) Section 126A of the Representation of the People Act, 1951: It prohibits conduct of exit poll and dissemination of their results during the period mentioned therein, i.e., the hour fixed for commencement of polls in the first phase and half hour after the time fixed for close of poll for the last phase in all the States and Union Territories.
(iii) Section 127A of the Representation of the People Act, 1951: The printing and publication of election pamphlets, posters, etc. is governed by its provisions, which make it mandatory to bear on its face the names and addresses of the printer and the publisher.
(iv) Section 171H of the Indian Penal Code: It prohibits incurring of expenditure on, inter alia, advertisement without the authority of the contesting candidate.

4. Voter Education and Participation:
There is scope for a much larger and committed partnership from media in the crucial area of voter awareness and participation. This is one of the most promising areas of the Election Commission-media relationship.
There is a gap between what the voters ‘should know’ and what they ‘actually know’ in important areas like registration, EPIC/ identity proofs, Polling Station location, use of EVMs, timings of the poll, use of money/ muscle power by candidates etc. The elector should be well-informed when he/she goes to exercise his/ her franchise on the day of the polls.
Voter education helps build an environment where values of democracy are understood and acted upon by the population. Media and civil society have an important role to play in fostering such an environment. To improve participation of all sections of the electorate, awareness levels need to be enhanced, especially amongst the freshly eligible youth, uneducated, residents of far-flung, inaccessible and remote areas, and socially and economically weaker sections of the society. Such segments need to be reached through the Media, apart from civil society and field based organisations. The Election Commission has in place a framework of engagement for collaboration between the Commission and Media Houses/ Organisations in this important area of voter participation. The Election Commission expects that the Media should volunteer to take up this task of informing, motivating and facilitating citizens to take part in the democratic elections.

5. Responsibility of Government Media:
In broadcast of election related news or analysis, Public Service Broadcasters are expected to lead by example in terms of neutrality and objectivity, and adhere to various guidelines including their own. The Election Commission has a fruitful arrangement with Prasar Bharati in providing free broadcast time on All India Radio and Doordarshan to recognised National and State parties so as to ensure a level playing field in elections. The political parties in this manner can reach out to every corner of the country, even in the remotest parts. In addition to this, Prasar Bharati’s contribution in spreading voter awareness and educating the public about their voting rights and responsibilities is of great consequence to the inclusion of all in the electoral process. The contribution of Prasar Bharati has come in good measure in this arena.
The Election Commission also urges PIB, DAVP, National Film Development Corporation, Directorate of Field Publicity, Song and Drama Division and many other Central and State Information Directorates/ Departments to come forward and shoulder the same responsibility.

Coalition Government:
MEANING OF COALITION GOVERNMENT:
The term ‘coalition’ is derived from the Latin word ‘coalitio’ which means ‘to grow together’. Thus, technically, coalition means the act of uniting parts into one body or whole. Politically, coalition means an alliance of distinct political parties.
Coalition politics or coalition government has been defined in the following way: When several political parties join hands to form a government and exercise political power on the basis of a common agreed programme/agenda, we can describe the system as coalition politics or coalition government.
Coalitions usually occur in modern parliaments when no single political party can muster a majority of votes. Two or more parties, who have enough elected members between them to form a majority, may then be able to agree on a common programme that does not require too many drastic compromises with their individual policies, and can proceed to form a government. Coalition denotes a co-operative arrangement under which distinct political parties, or at all events members of such parties, unite to form a government or ministry.
Coalition is a direct descendant of the exigencies of multi-party system in a democratic set-up. It is a phenomenon of a multi-party government where a number of minority parties join hands for the purpose of running the government. A coalition is formed when many splinter groups in a House agree to join hands on a common platform by sinking their broad differences and form a majority in the House.

FEATURES OF COALITION GOVERNMENT:
The features or implications of coalition politics or coalition government are very well summarised by J.C. Johari in the following way:
1. Coalitions are formed for the sake of some reward, material or psychic.
2. A coalition implies the existence of at least two partners.
3. The underlying principle of a coalition system stands on the simple fact of temporary conjunction of specific interest.
4. Coalition politics is not a static but a dynamic affair as coalition players and groups dissolve and form new ones.
5. The keynote of coalition politics is compromise, and rigid dogma has no place in it.
6. A coalition government works on the basis of a minimum programme, which may not be ideal for each partner of the coalition.
7. Pragmatism and not ideology is the hallmark of coalition politics. In making political adjustments, principles may have to be set aside.
8. The purpose of a coalition adjustment is to seize power. 
In our country, we have seen coalitions coming up either before the elections or after the elections. The pre-poll coalition is considerably advantageous because it provides a common platform to the parties in order to woo the electorate on the basis of a joint manifesto. The post-election union is intended to enable constituents to share political power and run the government.

FORMATION OF COALITION GOVERNMENTS:
In the first four Lok Sabha elections (1952, 1957, 1962 and 1967), the Congress party secured the required majority to form the government at the Centre. Even though there was a split in the Congress party in 1969, the minority government of Indira Gandhi managed to continue with the outside support of the CPI, the DMK and other parties. Again, the Congress party won the 1971 elections and formed a single-party government.
However, the dominant Congress party was badly defeated in the 1977 elections. Since then, there have been a number of coalition governments at the Centre. 

MERITS OF COALITION GOVERNMENT:
The various advantages or strengths of the coalition governments are as follows:
1. There is an accommodation of diverse interests in the functioning of the government. A coalition government acts as a channel to meet the expectations and redress the grievances of different groups.
2. India is a highly diversified country. There are different cultures, languages, castes, religions and ethnic groups, and all these get represented in the coalition governments. This means that a coalition government is more representative in nature and it better reflects the popular opinion of the electorate. In other words, it represents a much more broader spectrum of public opinion than the single-party government.
3. A coalition government comprises different political parties having their own ideologies or agendas. But, the governmental policy requires the concurrence of all the coalition partners. Therefore, a coalition government leads to consensus-based politics. In other words, there is consensual decision-making in the coalition governments.
4. Coalition politics strengthens the federal fabric of the Indian political system. This is because a coalition government is more sensitive and responsive to the regional demands and concerns than the single-party government.
5. A coalition government reduces the tyranny of government (despotic rule). This is due to the reduced domination of a single political party in the functioning of the government. All the members of the coalition participate in the political decision-making. In short, the decisions made are more balanced.

DEMERITS OF COALITION GOVERNMENT:
The various disadvantages or weaknesses of the coalition governments are as follows:
1. They are unstable or prone to instability. The difference of opinion among the coalition partners on policy issues leads to the collapse of the government.
2. Leadership of the Prime Minister is a principle of parliamentary form of government. This principle is curtailed in a coalition government as the Prime Minister is required to consult the coalition partners before taking any major decision. The critics have called them as ‘Super Prime Ministers’ or ‘Ultra Prime Ministers’.
3. The Steering Committee or the Co-ordination Committee of the coalition partners acts as the ‘Super-Cabinet’, and thereby it undermines the role and position of the cabinet in the functioning of the governmental machinery.
4. There is a possibility of the smaller constituents of the coalition government playing the role of a ‘King-maker’. They demand more than their strength in the Parliament.
5. The leaders of regional parties bring in the regional factors in the national decision-making. They pressurise the central executive to act on their lines; otherwise, they would threaten to withdraw from the coalition.
6. The size of the Council of Ministers in a coalition government is generally quite large. This is because the ministry has to reflect all the constituents of the coalition. For example, the A.B. Vajpayee ministry of 1999 had 70-plus ministers and it was called as ‘Jumbo Ministry’. This creates the problem of distribution of portfolios as well as the proper coordination among the members.
7. The members of coalition governments do not assume responsibility for the administrative failures and lapses. They play blame games and thereby escape from both collective responsibility as well as individual responsibility.

Anti-Defection Law
The 52nd Amendment Act of 1985 provided for the disqualification of the members of Parliament and the state legislatures on the ground of defection from one political party to another. For this purpose, it made changes in four Articles1 of the Constitution and added a new Schedule (the Tenth Schedule) to the Constitution. This act is often referred to as the ‘anti-defection law’.
Later, the 91st Amendment Act of 2003 made one change in the provisions of the Tenth Schedule. It omitted an exception provision i.e., disqualification on ground of defection not to apply in case of split.

PROVISIONS OF THE ACT:
The Tenth Schedule contains the following provisions with respect to the disqualification of members of Parliament and the state legislatures on the ground of defection:
1. Disqualification:
Members of Political Parties: A member of a House belonging to any political party becomes disqualified for being a member of the House, 
(a) if he voluntarily gives up his membership of such political party; or 
(b) if he votes or abstains from voting in such House contrary to any direction issued by his political party without obtaining prior permission of such party and such act has not been condoned by the party within 15 days. 
From the above provision it is clear that a member elected on a party ticket should continue in the party and obey the party directions.
Independent Members: An independent member of a House (elected without being set up as a candidate by any political party) becomes disqualified to remain a member of the House if he joins any political party after such election.
Nominated Members: A nominated member of a House becomes disqualified for being a member of the House if he joins any political party after the expiry of six months from the date on which he takes his seat in the House. This means that he may join any political party within six months of taking his seat in the House without inviting this disqualification.

2. Exceptions:
The above disqualification on the ground of defection does not apply in the following two cases:
(a) If a member goes out of his party as a result of a merger of the party with another party. A merger takes place when twothirds of the members of the party have agreed to such merger.
(b) If a member, after being elected as the presiding officer of the House, voluntarily gives up the membership of his party or rejoins it after he ceases to hold that office. This exemption has been provided in view of the dignity and impartiality of this office.
It must be noted here that the provision of the Tenth Schedule pertaining to exemption from disqualification in case of split by one-third members of legislature party has been deleted by the 91st Amendment Act of 2003. It means that the defectors have no more protection on grounds of splits.

3. Deciding Authority:
Any question regarding disqualification arising out of defection is to be decided by the presiding officer of the House. Originally, the act provided that the decision of the presiding officer is final and cannot be questioned in any court. However, in Kihoto Hollohan case (1993), the Supreme Court declared this provision as unconstitutional on the ground that it seeks to take away the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court and the high courts. It held that the presiding officer, while deciding a question under the Tenth Schedule, function as a tribunal. Hence, his decision like that of any other tribunal, is subject to judicial review on the grounds of mala fides, perversity, etc. But, the court rejected the contention that the vesting of adjudicatory powers in the presiding officer is by itself invalid on the ground of political bias.

4. Rule-Making Power:
The presiding officer of a House is empowered to make rules to give effect to the provisions of the Tenth Schedule. All such rules must be placed before the House for 30 days. The House may approve or modify or disapprove them. Further, he may direct that any willful contravention by any member of such rules may be dealt with in the same manner as a breach of privilege of the House.
According to the rules made so, the presiding officer can take up a defection case only when he receives a complaint from a member of the House. Before taking the final decision, he must give the member (against whom the complaint has been made) a chance to submit his explanation. He may also refer the matter to the committee of privileges for inquiry. Hence, defection has no immediate and automatic effect.

EVALUATION OF THE ACT:
The Tenth Schedule of the Constitution (which embodies the antidefection law) is designed to prevent the evil or mischief of political defections motivated by the lure of office or material benefits or other similar considerations. It is intended to strengthen the fabric of Indian parliamentary democracy by curbing unprincipled and unethical political defections. Rajiv Gandhi, the then Prime Minister, described it as the ‘first step towards cleaning-up public life’. The then Central law minister stated that the passing of the 52nd Amendment Bill (anti-defection bill) by a unanimous vote by both the Houses of Parliament was ‘a proof, if any, of the maturity and stability of Indian democracy’.

Advantages of the anti-defection law:
The following can be cited as the advantages of the anti-defection law:
(a) It provides for greater stability in the body politic by checking the propensity of legislators to change parties.
(b) It facilitates democratic realignment of parties in the legislature by way of merger of parties.
(c) It reduces corruption at the political level as well as nondevelopmental expenditure incurred on irregular elections.
(d) It gives, for the first time, a clear-cut constitutional recognition to the existence of political parties.

Criticism of the anti-defection law:
Though the anti-defection law been hailed as a bold step towards cleansing our political life and started as new epoch in the political life of the country, it has revealed may lacunae in its operation and failed to prevent defections in toto. It came to be criticised on the following grounds:
1. It does not make a differentiation between dissent and defection. It curbs the legislator’s right to dissent and freedom of conscience. Thus, ‘it clearly puts party bossism on a pedestal and sanctions tyranny of the party in the name of the party discipline’.
2. Its distinction between individual defection and group defection is irrational. In other words, ‘it banned only retail defections and legalised wholesale defections’.
3. It does not provide for the expulsion of a legislator from his party for his activities outside the legislature.
4. Its discrimination between an independent member and a nominated member is illogical. If the former joins a party, he is disqualified while the latter is allowed to do the same.
5. Its vesting of decision-making authority in the presiding officer is criticised on two grounds. Firstly, he may not exercise this authority in an impartial and objective manner due to political exigencies. Secondly, he lacks the legal knowledge and experience to adjudicate upon the cases. In fact, two Speakers of the Lok Sabha (Rabi Ray–1991 and Shivraj Patil–1993) have themselves expressed doubts on their suitability to adjudicate upon the cases related to defections.

91ST AMENDMENT ACT (2003):
The reasons for enacting the 91st Amendment Act (2003) are as follows:
1. Demands have been made from time to time in certain quarters for strengthening and amending the Anti-defection Law as contained in the Tenth Schedule, on the ground that these provisions have not been able to achieve the desired goal of checking defections. The Tenth Schedule has also been criticised on the ground that it allows bulk defections while declaring individual defections as illegal. The provision for exemption from disqualification in case of splits as provided in the Tenth Schedule has, in particular, come under severe criticism on account of its destabilising effect on the Government.
2. The Committee on Electoral Reforms (Dinesh Goswami Committee) in its report of 1990, the Law Commission of India in its 170th Report on “Reform of Electoral Laws” (1999) and the National Commission to Review the Working of the Constitution (NCRWC) in its report of 2002 have, inter alia, recommended omission of the provision of the Tenth Schedule pertaining to exemption from disqualification in case of splits.
3. The NCRWC was also of the view that a defector should be penalised for his action by debarring him from holding any public office as a minister or any other remunerative political post for at least the duration of the remaining term of the existing Legislature or until, the next fresh elections whichever is earlier.
4. The NCRWC has also observed that abnormally large Councils of Ministers were being constituted by various Governments at Centre and states and this practice had to be prohibited by law and that a ceiling on the number of ministers in a state or the Union Government be fixed at the maximum of 10% of the total strength of the popular House of the Legislature.

Provisions:
The 91st Amendment Act of 2003 has made the following provisions to limit the size of Council of Ministers, to debar
defectors from holding public offices, and to strengthen the antidefection law:
1. The total number of ministers, including the Prime Minister, in the Central Council of Ministers shall not exceed 15 per cent of the total strength of the Lok Sabha.
2. A member of either House of Parliament belonging to any political party who is disqualified on the ground of defection shall also be disqualified to be appointed as a minister.
3. The total number of ministers, including the Chief Minister, in the Council of Ministers in a state shall not exceed 15 per cent of the total strength of the Legislative Assembly of that state. But, the number of ministers, including the Chief Minister, in a state shall not be less than 12.
4. A member of either House of a state legislature belonging to any political party who is disqualified on the ground of defection shall also be disqualified to be appointed as a minister.
5. A member of either House of Parliament or either House of a State Legislature belonging to any political party who is disqualified on the ground of defection shall also be disqualified to hold any remunerative political post. The expression “remunerative political post” means 
(i) any office under the Central Government or a state government where the salary or remuneration for such office is paid out of the public revenue of the concerned government; or 
(ii) any office under a body, whether incorporated or not, which is wholly or partially owned by the Central Government or a state government and the salary or remuneration for such office is paid by such body, except where such salary or remuneration paid is compensatory in nature.
6. The provision of the Tenth Schedule (anti-defection law) pertaining to exemption from disqualification in case of split by one-third members of legislature party has been deleted. It means that the defectors have no more protection on grounds of splits.

Pressure Groups:
MEANING AND TECHNIQUES OF PRESSURE GROUPS:
The term ‘pressure group’ originated in the USA. A pressure group is a group of people who are organised actively for promoting and defending their common interest. It is so called as it attempts to bring a change in the public policy by exerting pressure on the government. It acts as a liaison between the government and its members.
The pressure groups are also called interest groups or vested groups. They are different from the political parties in that they neither contest elections nor try to capture political power. They are concerned with specific programmes and issues and their activities are confined to the protection and promotion of the interests of their members by influencing the government.
The pressure groups influence the policymaking and policyimplementation in the government through legal and legitimate methods like lobbying, correspondence, publicity, propagandising, petitioning, public debating, maintaining contacts with their legislators and so forth. However, some times they resort to illegitimate and illegal methods like strikes, violent activities and corruption which damages public interest and administrative integrity.
According to Odegard, pressure groups resort to three different techniques in securing their purposes. First, they can try to place in public office persons who are favourably disposed towards the interests they seeks to promote. This technique may be labelled electioneering. Second, they can try to persuade public officers, whether they are initially favourably disposed toward them or not, to adopt and enforce the policies that they think will prove most beneficial to their interests. This technique may be labelled lobbying. Third, they can try to influence public opinion and thereby gain an indirect influence over government, since the government in a democracy is substantially affected by public opinion. This technique may be labelled propagandizing.

PRESSURE GROUPS IN INDIA:
A large number of pressure groups exist in India. But, they are not developed to the same extent as in the US or the western countries like Britain, France, Germany and so on. The pressure groups in India can be broadly classified into the following categories:
1. Business Groups:
The business groups include a large number of industrial and commercial bodies. They are the most sophisticated, the most powerful and the largest of all pressure groups in India. They include:
(i) Federation of Indian Chamber of Commerce and Industry (FICCI); major constituents are the Indian Merchants Chamber of Bombay, Indian Merchants Chamber of Calcutta and South Indian Chamber of Commerce of Madras. It broadly represents major industrial and trading interests.
(ii) Associated Chamber of Commerce and Industry of India (ASSOCHAM); major constituents are the Bengal Chamber of Commerce of Calcutta and Central Commercial Organisation of Delhi. ASSOCHAM represents foreign British capital.
(iii) Federation of All India Foodgrain Dealers Association (FAIFDA). FAIFDA is the sole representative of the grain dealers.
(iv) All-India Manufacturers Organisation (AIMO). AIMO raises the concerns of the medium-sized industry.

2. Trade Unions:
The trade unions voice the demands of the industrial workers. They are also known as labour groups. A peculiar feature of trade unions in India is that they are associated either directly or indirectly with different political parties. They include:
(i) All-India Trade Union Congress (AITUC)–affiliated to CPI
(ii) Indian National Trade Union Congress (INTUC)–affiliated to the Congress
(iii) Hind Mazdoor Sabha (HMS)–affiliated to the Socialists
(iv) Centre of Indian Trade Unions (CITU)– affiliated to the CPM
(v) Bharatiya Mazdoor Sangh (BMS)– affiliated to the BJP
First Trade Union in India: All India Trade Union Congress (AITUC) was founded in 1920 with Lala Lajpat Rai as its first president. Upto 1945, Congressmen, Socialists and Communists worked in the AITUC which was the central trade union organisation of workers of India. Subsequently, the trade union movement got split on political lines.

3. Agrarian Groups:
The agrarian groups represent the farmers and the agricultural labour class. They include:
(i) Bhartiya Kisan Union (in the wheat belt of North India)
(ii) All India Kisan Sabha (the oldest and the largest agrarian group)
(iii) Revolutionary Peasants Convention (organised by the CPM in 1967 which gave birth to the Naxalbari Movement)
(iv) Bhartiya Kisan Sangh (Gujarat)
(v) R.V. Sangham (Tamil Nadu)
(vi) Shetkhari Sanghatana (Maharashtra)
(vii) Hind Kisan Panchayat (controlled by the Socialists)
(viii) All-India Kisan Sammelan
(ix) United Kisan Sabha (controlled by the CPM)

4. Professional Associations:
These are associations that raise the concerns and demands of doctors, lawyers, journalists and teachers. Despite various restrictions, these associations pressurise the government by various methods including agitations for the improvement of their service conditions. They include:
(i) Indian Medical Association (IMA)
(ii) Bar Council of India (BCI)
(iii) Indian Federation of Working Journalists (IFWJ)
(iv) All India Federation of University and College Teachers (AIFUCT)

5. Student Organisations:
Various unions have been formed to represent the student community. However, these unions, like the trade unions, are also affiliated to various political parties. These are:
(i) Akhil Bharatiya Vidyarthi Parishad (ABVP) (affiliated to BJP)
(ii) All India Students Federation (AISF) (affiliated to CPI)
(iii) National Students Union of India (NSUI) (affiliated to Congress)
(iv) Student Federation of India (SFI) (affiliated to CPM)

6. Religious Organisations:
The organisations based on religion have come to play an important role in Indian politics. They represent the narrow communal interest. They include:
(i) Rashtriya Swayam Sevak Sangh (RSS)
(ii) Vishwa Hindu Parishad (VHP)
(iii) Jamaat-e-Islami
(iv) Ittehad-ul-Mussalmeen
(v) Anglo-Indian Association
(vi) Associations of the Roman Catholics
(vii) All-India Conference of Indian Christians 
(viii) Parsi Central Association
(ix) Shiromani Akali Dal
“The Shiromani Akali Dal should be regarded as more of a religious pressure group rather than a political party in view of the fact that it has been concerned more with the mission of saving the sikh community from being absorbed into the ocean of hindu society than with fighting for the cause of a sikh homeland”.

7. Caste Groups:
Like religion, caste has been an important factor in Indian politics. The competitive politics in many states of the Indian Union is in fact the politics of caste rivalries: Brahmin versus Non-Brahmin in Tamil Nadu and Maharashtra, Rajput versus Jat in Rajasthan, Kamma versus Reddy in Andhra, Ahir versus Jat in Haryana, Baniya Brahmin versus Patidar in Gujarat. Kayastha versus Rajput in Bihar, Nair versus Ezhava in Kerala and Lingayat versus Okkaliga in Karnataka. Some of the caste-based organisations are:
(i) Nadar Caste Association in Tamil Nadu
(ii) Marwari Association
(iii) Harijan Sevak Sangh
(iv) Kshatriya Maha Sabha in Gujarat
(v) Vanniyakul Kshatriya Sangam
(vi) Kayastha Sabha

8. Tribal Organisations:
The tribal organisations are active in MP, Chattisgarh, Bihar, Jharkhand, West Bengal and the North Eastern States of Assam, Manipur, Nagaland and so on. Their demands range from reforms to that of secession from India and some of them are involved in insurgency activities. The tribal organisations include:
(i) National Socialist Council of Nagaland (NSCN)
(ii) Tribal National Volunteers (TNU) in Tripura
(iii) People’s Liberation Army in Manipur
(iv) All-India Jharkhand
(v) Tribal Sangh of Assam
(vi) United Mizo Federal Organisation

9. Linguistic Groups:
Language has been so important factor in Indian politics that it became the main basis for the reorganisation of states. The language along with caste, religion and tribe have been responsible for the emergence of political parties as well as pressure groups. Some of the linguistic groups are:
(i) Tamil Sangh
(ii) Anjuman Tarraki-i-Urdu
(iii) Andhra Maha Sabha
(iv) Hindi Sahitya Sammelan
(v) Nagari Pracharani Sabha
(vi) Dakshina Bharat Hindi Prachar Sabha

10. Ideology Based Groups:
In more recent times, the pressure groups are formed to pursue a particular ideology, i.e., a cause, a principle or a programme. These groups include:
(i) Environmental protection groups like Narmada Bachao Andolan, and Chipko Movement
(ii) Democratic rights organisations
(iii) Civil liberties associations
(iv) Gandhi Peace Foundation
(v) Woman rights organisations

11. Anomic Groups:
Almond and Powell observed: “By anomic pressure groups we mean more or less a spontaneous breakthrough into the political system from the society such as riots, demonstrations, assassinations and the like. The Indian Government and bureaucratic elite, overwhelmed by the problem of economic development and scarcity of resources available to them, inevitably acquires a technocratic and anti-political frame of mind, particularistic demands of whatever kinds are denied legitimacy. As a consequence interest groups are alienated from the political system”. Some of the anomic pressure groups are:
(i) All-India Sikh Student’s Federation.
(ii) Nava Nirman Samithi of Gujarat.
(iii) Naxalite Groups.
(iv) Jammu and Kashmir Liberation Front (JKLF).
(v) All Assam Student’s Union.
(vi) United Liberation Front of Assam (ULFA).
(vii) Dal Khalsa.

National Integration:
India is a land of widespread diversities in terms of religion, language, caste, tribe, race, region and so on. Hence, the achievement of national integration becomes very essential for the all-around development and prosperity of the country.

MEANING OF NATIONAL INTEGRATION:
Definitions and statements on national integration:
“National integration implies avoidance of divisive movements that would balkanise the nation and presence of attitudes throughout the society that give preference to national and public interest as distinct from parochial interests” Myron Weiner. “National integration is a socio-psychological and educational process through which a feeling of unity, solidarity and cohesion develops in the hearts of the people and a sense of common citizenship or feeling of loyalty to the nation is fostered among them” HA Gani.

“National integration is not a house which could be built by mortar and bricks. It is not an industrial plan too which could be discussed and implemented by experts. Integration, on the contrary, is a thought which must go into the heads of the people. It is the consciousness which must awaken the people at large” Dr. S. Radhakrishna.

“National integrations means, and ought to mean, cohesion not fusion, unity but not uniformity, reconciliation but not merger, agglomeration but not assimilation of the discrete segments of the people constituting a political community or state” Rasheeduddin Khan.

To sum-up, the concept of national integration involves political, economic, social, cultural and psychological dimensions and the inter-relations between them. 

OBSTACLES TO NATIONAL INTEGRATION:
Among the major obstacles to national integration include:
1. Regionalism:
Regionalism refers to sub-nationalism and sub-territorial loyalty. It implies the love for a particular region or state in preference to the country as a whole. There is also subregionalism, that is, love for a particular region in preference to the state of which the region forms a part.
Regionalism is “a subsidiary process of political integration in India. It is a manifestation of those residual elements which do not find expression in the national polity and national culture, and being excluded from the centrality of the new polity, express themselves in political discontent and political exclusionism”4 . Regionalism is a country-wide phenomenon which manifests itself in the following six forms:
(i) Demand of the people of certain states for secession from the Indian Union (like Khalistan, Dravid Nad, Mizos, Nagas and so on).
(ii) Demand of the people of certain areas for separate statehood (like Telengana, Bodoland, Uttarkhand, Vidharbha, Gorkhaland and so on).
(iii) Demand of people of certain Union Territories for full-fledged statehood (like Manipur, Tripura, Puducherry, Delhi, Goa, Daman and Diu and so on).
(iv) Inter-state boundary disputes (like Chandigarh and Belgaum) and riverwater disputes (like Cauvery, Krishna, Ravi-Beas and so on).
(v) Formation of organisations with regional motives which advocates a militant approach in pursuing its policies and goals (like Shiv Sena, Tamil Sena, Hindi Sena, Sardar Sena, Lachit Sena and so on).
(vi) ‘Sons of the soil theory’ which advocates preference to local people in government jobs, private jobs, permits and so on.
Their slogan will be Assam for Assamese, Maharashtra for Maharashtrians and so on.

2. Communalism:
Communalism means love for one’s religious community in preference to the nation and a tendency to promote the communal interest at the cost of the interest of other religious communities. It has its roots in the British rule where the 1909, 1919 and 1935 Acts had introduced communal representation for the Muslims, Sikhs and others.
The communalism got accentuated with the politicisation of religion. Its various manifestations are:
(i) Formation of political parties based on religion (like Akali Dal, Muslim League, Ram Rajya Parishad, Hindu Mahasabha, Shiv Sena and so on).
(ii) Emergence of pressure groups (nonpolitical entities) based on religion (like RSS, Vishwa Hindu Parishad, Jamaat-eIslami, Anglo-Indian Christians Association and so on).
(iii) Communal riots (between Hindus and Muslims, Hindus and Sikhs, Hindus and Christians and so on–Benaras, Lucknow, Mathura, Hyderabad, Allahabad, Aligarh, Amritsar, Moradabad and some other places are affected by communal violence).
(iv) Dispute over religious structures like temples, mosques and others (The dispute over Ram Janma Bhoomi in Ayodhya where the kar sevaks had demolished a disputed structure on December 6, 1992).
The reasons for the persistence of com-munalism include religious orthodoxy of muslims, role of Pakistan, hindu chauvinism, government’s inertia, role of political parties and other groups, electoral compulsions, communal media, socio-economic factors and so on.

3. Casteism:
Casteism implies love for one’s own caste-group in preference to the general national interest. It is mainly an outcome of the politicisation of caste. Its various manifestations include:
(i) Formation of political parties on the basis of caste (like Justice Party in Madras, DMK, Kerala Congress, Republican Party, Bahujan Samaj Party and so on).
(ii) Emergence of pressure groups (nonpolitical entities) based on caste (like Nadar Association, Harijan Sevak Sangh, Kshatriya Mahasabha and so on).
(iii) Allotment of party tickets during elections and the formation of council of ministers in the states on caste lines. 
(iv) Caste conflicts between higher and lower castes or between dominant castes in various states like Bihar, Uttar Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh and so on.
(v) Violent disputes and agitations over the reservation policy. B.K. Nehru observed: “The communal electorates (of the British days) in a vestigal form still remain in the shape of reservations for the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes. They serve to emphasise caste origin and make people conscious of the caste in which they were born. This is not conducive to national integration”.
At the state level, the politics is basically a fight between the major caste groups like Kamma versus Reddy in Andhra Pradesh, Lingayat versus Vokaligga in Karnataka, Nayar versus Ezhava in Kerala, Bania versus Patidar in Gujarat, Bhumiar versus Rajput in Bihar, Jat versus Ahir in Haryana, Jat versus Rajput in Uttar Pradesh, Kalita versus Ahom in Assam and so on.

4. Linguism:
Linguism means love for one’s language and hatred towards other language-speaking people. The phenomena of linguism, like that of regionalism, communalism or casteism, is also a consequence of political process. It has two dimensions: 
(a) the reorganisation of states on the basis of language; and 
(b) the determination of the official language of the Union.
The creation of the first linguistic state of Andhra out of the then Madras state in 1953 led to the countrywide demand for the reorganisation of states on the basis of language. Consequently, the states were reorganised on a large-scale in 1956 on the basis of the recommendations made by the States Reorganisation

Commission (1953–1955). Even after this, the political map of India underwent a continuous change due to the pressure of popular agitations and the political conditions, which resulted in the bifurcation of existing states like Bombay, Punjab, Assam, and so on. By the end of 2000, the number of states and union territories had reached 28 and 7 from that of 14 and 6 in 1956 respectively.
The enactment of the Official Language Act (1963) making
Hindi as the Official Language of the Union led to the rise of antiHindi agitation in South India and West Bengal. Then, the Central government assured that English would continue as an ‘associate’ official language so long as the non-Hindi speaking states desire it. Moreover, the three-language formula (English, Hindi and a regional language) for school system is still not being implemented in Tamil Nadu. Consequently, Hindi could not emerge as the lingua franca of the composite culture of India as desired by the framers of the Constitution.
The problem of linguism got accentuated with the rise of some regional parties in recent times like the TDP, AGP, Shiv Sena and so on.

NATIONAL INTEGRATION COUNCIL (NIC):
The National Integration Council (NIC) was constituted in 1961, following a decision taken at a national conference on ‘unity in diversity’, convened by the Central government, at New Delhi. It consisted of the prime minister as chairman, central home minister, chief ministers of states, seven leaders of political parties, the chairman of the UGC, two educationists, the commissioner for SCs and STs and seven other persons nominated by the prime minister. The council was directed to examine the problem of national integration in all its aspects and make necessary recommendations to deal with it. The council made various recommendations for national integration. However, these recommendations remained only on paper and no effort was made either by the Centre or by the states to implement them.

In 1968, the Central government revived the National Integration Council. Its size was increased from 39 to 55 members. The representatives of industry, business and trade unions were also included in it. The council met at Srinagar and adopted a resolution condemning all tendencies that struck at the root of national solidarity. It appealed to the political parties, organisations and the press to mobilise the constructive forces of society in the cause of national unity and solidarity. It also set up three committes to report on regionalism, communalism and linguism respectively. However, nothing tangible was achieved. In 1980, the Central government again revived the National Integration Council which had become defunct. Its membership was made more broad-based. It had three items on the agenda for discussion viz., the problem of communal harmony, unrest in the north-eastern region and need for a new education system. The council set up a standing committee to keep a constant watch on the activities of communal and other divisive forces posing a threat to the national unity.
In 1986, the NIC was reconstituted and its membership was further increased. It recognised terrorism in Punjab as an attack on the unity, integrity and secular ideals of the country. Accordingly, it passed a resolution to fight terrorism in Punjab. The council also set up a 21-member committee to function on a continuing basis. The committee was asked to formulate both short-term as well as long-term proposals for maintaining communal harmony and preserving national integrity.

In 1990, the National Front Government headed by V.P. Singh reconstituted the National Integration Council. Its strength was increased to 101. It included prime minister as chairman, some Central ministers, state chief ministers, leaders of national and regional parties, representatives of women, trade and industry, academicians, journalists and public figures. It had various items on the agenda for discussion, viz., Punjab problem, Kashmir problem, violence by secessionists, communal harmony and Ram Janmabhomi-Babri Masjid problem at Ayodhya. But, there was no concrete result.

In 2005, the United Progressive Alliance (UPA) Government reconstituted the National Integration Council under the chairmanship of the Prime Minister, Manmohan Singh. The 103member NIC was constituted after a gap of 12 years having held its meeting in 1992. Besides some central ministers, state and UT chief ministers and leaders of national and regional parties, the NIC included chairpersons of National Commissions, eminent public figures and representatives from business, media, labour and women. The NIC was to function as a forum for effective initiative and interaction on issues of national concern, review issues relating to national integration and make recommendations.

The 14th meeting of the NIC was held in 2008 in the backdrop of communal violence in various states like Orissa, Karnataka, Maharashtra, Jammu and Kashmir and Assam and so on. Promotion of education among minorities, scheduled castes and scheduled tribes; elements contributing to national integration; removal of regional imbalances, caste and identity divisions; prevention of extremism; promotion of communal harmony and security among minorities; and equitable development were some of the important items on the agenda of the meeting.
In April 2010, the United Progressive Alliance (UPA) Government again reconstituted the National Integration Council (NIC) under the chairmanship of the Prime Minister, Manmohan Singh. The NIC has 147 members, including Union Ministers, Leaders of the Opposition in the Lok Sabha and the Rajya Sabha, the Chief Ministers of all states and union territories with Legislatures. It also includes leaders of national and regional political parties, chairpersons of national commissions, eminent journalists, public figures, and representatives of business and women’s organisations. It is chiefly aimed at suggesting means and ways to combat the menace of communalism, casteism and regionalism.

In October 2010, the Government also constituted a Standing Committee of the NIC. It consists of Union Home Minister as Chairman, four Union Ministers, nine Chief Ministers of various states and five co-opted members from NIC. It would finalise the agenda items for NIC meetings.
The 15th meeting of the NIC was held in September, 2011. The agenda for the meeting included measures to curb communalism and communal violence; approach to the Communal Violence Bill; measures to promote communal harmony; measures to eliminate discrimination, especially against minorities and scheduled tribes; how the state and the police should handle civil disturbances; and how to curb radicalisation of youth in the name of religion and caste.

The 16th meeting of the NIC was held on 23–09-2013. A Resolution was passed in the meeting to condemn violence, take all measures to strengthen harmonious relationship between all communities, to resolve differences and disputes among the people within the framework of law, to condemn atrocities on Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes, to condemn sexual abuse and to ensure that all women enjoy the fruits of freedom to pursue their social and economic development with equal opportunities, and to safeguard their right of movement in the public space at any time of the day or night.

NATIONAL FOUNDATION FOR COMMUNAL HARMONY (NFCH):
The National Foundation for Communal Harmony (NFCH) was set up in 1992. It is an autonomous body under the administrative control of the Union Home Ministry. It promotes communal harmony, fraternity and national integration.
The vision and mission of the NFCH are as follows:
Vision: India free from communal and all other forms of violence where all citizens especially children and youth live together in peace and harmony.
Mission: Promoting communal harmony, strengthening national integration and fostering unity in diversity through collaborative social action, awareness programs, reaching out to the victims of violence especially children, encouraging interfaith dialogue for India’s shared security, peace and prosperity.

The activities undertaken by the NFCH are mentioned below:
1. To provide financial assistance to the child victims of societal violence for their care, education and training, aimed at their effective rehabilitation
2. To promote communal harmony and national integration by organising variety of activities either independently or in association with educational institutions, NGOs & other organisations
3. To conduct studies and grant scholarships to institutions / scholars for conducting studies
4. To confer awards for outstanding contribution to communal harmony and national integration
5. To involve Central / state governments / UT Administrations, industrial / commercial organisations, NGOs and others in promoting the objectives of the Foundation
6. To provide information services, publish monographs and books, etc. on the subject

Foreign Policy
The foreign policy of India regulates India’s relations with other states of the world in promoting its national interests. It is determined by a number of factors, viz., geography, history and tradition, social structure, political organisation, international milieu, economic position, military strength, public opinion and leadership.

PRINCIPLES OF INDIAN FOREIGN POLICY:
1. Promotion of World Peace:
India’s foreign policy aims at the promotion of international peace and security. Article 51 of the Constitution (Directive Principles of State Policy) directs the Indian State to promote international peace and security, maintain just and honourable relations between nations, foster respect for international law and treaty obligations, and encourage settlement of international disputes by arbitration. Besides peace is necessary to promote the economic development of nations. Jawaharlal Nehru said: “Peace to us is not just a fervent hope; it is emergent necessity”. 

2. Anti-Colonialism:
The foreign policy of India opposes colonialism and imperialism. India views that the colonialism and imperialism leads to exploitation of the weaker nations by the imperialist powers and affects the promotion of international peace. India advocated the liquidation of colonialism in all forms and supported the liberation movement in Afro-Asian countries like Indonesia, Malaya, Tunisia, Algeria, Ghana, Namibia and so on. Thus, India expressed her solidarity with the people of Afro-Asian nations in their struggle against colonial and imperialist forces like Britain, France, Holland, Portugal and so on. The present neo-colonialism and neo-imperialism is also opposed by India. 

3. Anti-Racialism:
Opposition to racialism in all its forms is an important aspect of Indian foreign policy. According to India, racialism (i.e., discrimination between people on the basis of race), like colonialism and imperialism, leads to exploitation of the blacks by the whites, social inequity and hinders the promotion of world peace. India strongly criticised the policy of apartheid (racial discrimination) being followed by the white minority racist regime of South Africa. It even snapped diplomatic relations with South Africa in 1954 as a protest against the policy of apartheid. Similarly, India played an important role in the liberation of Zimbabwe (earlier Rhodesia) and Namibia from the white domination.

4. Non-Alignment:
When India became independent in 1947, the world was divided into two blocs on ideological basis, namely, the capitalist bloc headed by USA and the communist bloc headed by the former USSR. In such a situation of ‘cold war’, India refused to join any of these two blocs and adopted a policy of non-alignment. In this context, Jawaharlal Nehru observed: “We propose to keep away from the power politics of groups, aligned against one another, which have led in the past to world wars and which may again lead to disasters on an even vaster scale. I feel that India can play a big part, and perhaps an effective part, in helping to avoid war.
Therefore, it becomes all the more necessary that India should not be lined up with any group of power which for various reasons are full of fear of war and prepare for war”.
“When we say that India follows a policy of non-alignment, it means 
(i) that India has no military alliances with countries of either bloc or indeed with any nation; 
(ii) India has an independent approach to foreign policy; and 
(iii) India attempts to maintain friendly relations with all countries”.

5. Panchsheel:
Panchsheel implies the five principles of conduct in international relations. It was embodied in the Preamble of the Indo-China Treaty on Tibet, signed in 1954 by Jawaharlal Nehru and ChouEn-Lai, the Chinese Premier. The five principles were:
(i) mutual respect for each other’s territorial integrity and sovereignty;
(ii) non-aggression;
(iii) non-interference in each other’s internal affairs;
(iv) equality and mutual benefit; and
(v) peaceful co-existence.

“India perceived the ‘Panchsheel’ as productive of peaceful cooperation of sovereign nations instead of the balance of terror and the degrading cold war tensions, being brought about by the rival great power pacts and alliances. India explained it as based on the concept of universalism as against the concept of the balance of power”.
Panchsheel became very popular and many countries of the world like Burma, Yugoslavia, Indonesia and so on adopted it. Panchsheel and non-alignment are the greatest contributions of India to the theory and practice of international relations.

6. Afro-Asian Bias:
Even though the foreign policy of India stands for maintaining friendly relations with all the countries of the world, it has always exhibited a special bias towards the Afro-Asian nations. It aims at promoting unity among them and tries to secure for them a voice and an influence in the international bodies. India has been seeking international assistance for the economic development of these countries. In 1947, India called the first Asian Relations Conference in New Delhi. In 1949, India brought together the Asian countries on the burning issue of Indonesian freedom. India played an active role in the Afro-Asian Conference at Bandung (Indonesia) in 1955. India also played an important role in the formation of Group of 77 (1964), Group of 15 (1990), Indian Ocean Rim Association for Regional Cooperation (1995), BIST Economic Cooperation (1997), and SAARC (1985). India earned the name of ‘Big Brother’ from many of the neighbouring countries.

7. Links with Commonwealth:
In 1949 itself, India declared the continuation of her full membership of the Commonwealth of the Nations and the acceptance of the British Crown as the head of the Commonwealth. But, this extra-constitutional declaration does not affect India’s sovereignty in any manner as the Commonwealth is a voluntary association of independent nations. It also does not affect India’s republican character as India neither pays final allegiance to the British Crown nor the latter has any functions to discharge in relation to India.
India remained a member of the Commonwealth because of pragmatic reasons. It thought that the membership in the Commonwealth would be beneficial to her in the economic, political, cultural and other spheres. It has been playing an important role at the CHOGM (Commonwealth Heads of Governments Meet). India hosted the 24th Commonwealth Summit at New Delhi in 1983.

8. Support to the UNO:
India became a member of the UNO in 1945 itself. Since then, it has been supporting the activities and programmes of UNO. It has expressed full faith in the objectives and principles of UNO. Some of the facets of India’s role in UNO are:
(i) It is through the UNO that India embarked on the policy of fighting against the colonialism, imperialism and racialism, and now neo-colonialism and neo-imperialism.
(ii) In 1953, Vijay Lakshmi Pandit of India was elected as the President of the UN General Assembly.
(iii) India actively participated in the UN Peace-keeping missions in Korea, Congo, El Salvador, Combodia, Angola, Somalia, Mozambique, Sierra Leone, Yugoslavia and so on.
(iv) India continued to participate actively in the open ended working groups of the UNO. India was the Co-chairman of the working group on the strengthening of the UN which submitted its report in 1997.
(v) Several times, India has been a nonpermanent member of the UN Security Council. Now, India is demanding a permanent seat in the Security Council.

9. Disarmament:
The foreign policy of India is opposed to arms race and advocates disarmament, both conventional and nuclear. This is aimed at promoting world peace and security by reducing or ending tensions between power blocs and to accelerate economic development of the country by preventing the unproductive expenditure on the manufacture of arms. India has been using the UNO platform to check the arms race and to achieve disarmament. India took the initiative of holding a six-nation summit at New Delhi in 1985 and made concrete proposals for nuclear disarmament.
By not signing the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty (NPT) of 1968 and the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty (CTBT) of 1996, India has kept its nuclear options open. India opposes NPT and CTBT due to their discriminatory and hegemonistic nature. They perpetuate an international system in which only five nations (USA, Russia, China, UK and France) can legitimately posses nuclear weapons.

OBJECTIVES OF INDIAN FOREIGN POLICY:
India’s foreign policy is directed towards the realisation of the following objectives5 :
1. To protect India’s core national interests and concerns in a rapidly changing international environment by fostering support and understanding in the international community.
2. To preserve the autonomy of the decision making process and to play a pioneering role in the establishment of a stable, prosperous and secure global order. 
3. To strengthen the international campaign against terrorism which is a global threat.
4. To build an international environment which is supportive of India’s rapid economic growth including higher investments, trade, access to technology and strengthening India’s energy security.
5. To work closely with P-5 countries and to build strategic ties with the major powers such as the USA, the EU, Japan, Russia, and China.
6. To intensify and strengthen ties with neighbours through mutually beneficial cooperation and by acknowledgement of each other’s legitimate concerns.
7. To work for the realisation of SAARC as an economically integrated region at peace with itself and engaged with the world.
8. To ensure that cross-border terrorism is brought to an end and the entire infrastructure of terrorism operating from Pakistan is dismantled.
9. To further the gains from India’s ‘Act East’ Policy (erstwhile ‘Look East’ Policy) and aspire for substantive progress in several areas of common interest to India and ASEAN.
10. To strengthen our ties with the countries of the Gulf region that has become home to over 4 million Indians and is a major source of supply of oil and gas.
11. To leverage economic growth through support to the activities of regional organisations like the Bay of Bengal Initiative for Multi-Sectoral Technical and Economic Cooperation (BIMSTEC), Mekong-Ganga Cooperation and trans-regional groupings like the India, Brazil and South Africa (IBSA) Initiative and Indian Ocean Rim Association for Regional Cooperation (IOR-ARC).
12. To continue to work closely with regional groupings like the EU and G-20 for furthering India’s interests in the international arena.
13. To reform and restructure the UN Security Council and espouse multi-polarity in a world order that respects the principles of sovereignty and non-intervention.
14. To promote a more equitable equation between the developed and the developing world in the political, economic and technological domains.
15. To work towards the goal of global nuclear disarmament within a timebound framework.
16. To closely interact with the Indian diaspora on a continuing basis in order to strengthen their bonds with India and to recognise their pivotal role in India’s international relations.

GUJRAL DOCTRINE OF INDIA:
The Gujral Doctrine is a milestone in India’s foreign policy. It was propounded and initiated in 1996 by I.K. Gujral, the then Foreign Minister in the Deve Gowda Government.
The doctrine advocates that India, being the biggest country in South Asia, should extend unilateral concessions to the smaller neighbours. In other words, the doctrine is formulated on India’s accommodating approach towards its smaller neighbours on the basis of the principle of non-reciprocity. It recognises the supreme importance of friendly and cordial relations with India’s neighbours.
The doctrine is a five-point roadmap to guide the conduct of India’s foreign relations with its immediate neighbours. These five principles are as follows:
1. With the neighbours like Bangladesh, Bhutan, Maldives, Nepal and Sri Lanka, India should not ask for reciprocity, but give to them what it can in good faith.
2. No South Asian country should allow its territory to be used against the interest of another country of the region.
3. No country should interfere in the internal affairs of another country.
4. All South Asian countries should respect each other’s territorial integrity and sovereignty.
5. All South Asian countries should settle all their disputes through peaceful bilateral negotiations.
Gujral himself explained: “The logic behind the Gujral Doctrine was that since we had to face two hostile neighbours in the north and the west, we had to be at ‘total peace’ with all other immediate neighbours in order to contain Pakistan’s and China’s influence in the region.”

NUCLEAR DOCTRINE OF INDIA:
India adopted its nuclear doctrine in 2003. The salient features of this doctrine are as follows:
1. Building and maintaining a credible minimum deterrent.
2. A posture of “No First Use” - nuclear weapons will only be used in retaliation against a nuclear attack on Indian territory or on Indian forces anywhere.
3. Nuclear retaliation to a first strike will be massive and designed to inflict unacceptable damage.
4. Nuclear retaliatory attacks can only be authorised by the civilian political leadership through the Nuclear Command Authority.
5. Non-use of nuclear weapons against nonnuclear weapon states.
6. However, in the event of a major attack against India, or Indian forces anywhere, by biological or chemical weapons, India will retain the option of retaliating with nuclear weapons.
7. A continuance of strict controls on export of nuclear and missile related materials and technologies, participation in the Fissile Material Cutoff Treaty negotiations, and continued observance of the moratorium on nuclear tests.
8. Continued commitment to the goal of a nuclear-weapon-free world, through global, verifiable and non-discriminatory nuclear disarmament.

The Nuclear Command Authority comprises a Political Council and an Executive Council. The Political Council is chaired by the Prime Minister. It is the sole body which can authorise the use of nuclear weapons. The Executive Council is chaired by the National Security Advisor. It provides inputs for decision making by the Nuclear Command Authority and executes the directives given to it by the Political Council.
The Cabinet Committee on Security (CCS) reviewed the progress in the operationalising of India’s nuclear doctrine. The CCS reviewed the existing command and control structures, the state of readiness, the targeting strategy for a retaliatory attack, and operating procedures for various stages of alert and launch. The CCS expressed satisfaction with the overall preparedness. The CCS approved the appointment of a Commander-in-Chief, Strategic Forces Command, to manage and administer all Strategic Forces. The CCS also reviewed and approved the arrangements for alternate chains of command for retaliatory nuclear strikes in all eventualities.

CONNECT CENTRAL ASIA POLICY OF INDIA:
India launched the “Connect Central Asia” Policy in 2012. This policy is aimed at strengthening and expanding of India’s relations with the Central Asian countries. These countries include
Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan.
India’s “Connect Central Asia” policy is a broad-based approach including political, security, economic and cultural connections. Its features (or elements) are as follows:
1. India will continue to build on its strong political relations through the exchange of high level visits. India’s leaders will continue to interact closely both in bilateral and multilateral fora.
2. India will strengthen its strategic and security cooperation. India already has strategic partnerships with some Central Asian countries. The focus will be on military training, joint research, counter-terrorism coordination and close consultations on Afghanistan.
3. India will step up multilateral engagement with Central Asian partners using the synergy of joint efforts through existing fora like the SCO, Eurasian Economic Community (EEC) and the Custom Union. India has already proposed a Comprehensive Economic Cooperation Agreement to integrate its markets with the unifying Eurasian space.
4. India looks to Central Asia as a longterm partner in energy, and natural resources. Central Asia possesses large cultivable tracts of land and there is potential for India to cooperate in production of profitable crops with value addition.
5. The medical field is another area that offers huge potential for cooperation. India is ready to extend cooperation by setting up civil hospitals/clinics in Central Asia.
6. India’s higher education system delivers at a fraction of the fees charged by Western universities. Keeping this in mind, India would like to assist in the setting up of a Central Asian University in Bishkek that could come up as a centre of excellence to impart world class education in areas like IT, management, philosophy and languages.
7. India is working on setting up a Central Asian e-network with its hub in India, to deliver, tele-education and tele-medicine connectivity, linking all the five Central Asian States.
8. Indian companies can showcase India’s capability in the construction sector and build world class structures at competitive rates. Central Asian countries, especially Kazakhstan, have almost limitless reserves of iron ore and coal, as well as abundant cheap electricity. India can help set up several medium size steel rolling mills, producing its requirement of specific products.
9. As for land connectivity, India has reactivated the International North-South Transport Corridor (INSTC). There is a need to discuss ways to bridge the missing links in the Corridor at the earliest and also work on other connecting spurs along the route.
10. Absence of a viable banking infrastructure in the region is a major barrier to trade and investment. Indian banks can expand their presence if they see a favourable policy environment.
11. India and Central Asian nations will jointly work to improve air connectivity between them. India is one of the biggest markets for outbound travelers estimated at USD 21 billion in 2011. Many countries have opened tourist offices in India to woo Indian tourists. Central Asian countries could emerge as attractive holiday destinations for tourists and even for the Indian film industry which likes to depict exotic foreign locales in its films.
12. Connections between the people are the most vital linkages to sustain the deep engagement. There is particularly need to emphasise exchanges between youth and the future leaders of India and Central Asia. There is already a robust exchange of students. India and Central Asian nations will encourage regular exchanges of scholars, academics, civil society and youth delegations to gain deeper insights into each other’s cultures.

India’s “Connect Central Asia” policy is consonant with its overall policy of deepening engagement in Eurasia, its policy of strengthening relations with China, with Pakistan, and building on its traditional relationship with Russia. India hopes that its membership in numerous regional forums including at the SCO, would bolster India’s renewed linkages with the region. 

ACT EAST POLICY OF INDIA:
In 2014, the Modi Government upgraded India’s “Look East Policy” and re-named it as the “Act East Policy”. The “Look East Policy” was first initiated in 1992 by the then Prime Minister P.V. Narasimha Rao.
While addressing the India-ASEAN Summit (2014), the Prime Minister Narendra Modi said : “A new era of economic development, industrialization and trade has begun in India. Externally, India’s ‘Look East Policy’ has become ‘Act East Policy’”. Similarly, the External Affairs Minister Sushma Swaraj, during her visit to Vietnam in 2014, told Indian envoys to ‘Act East’ and not just ‘Look East’.
The features (or elements) of India’s “Act East Policy” are as follows7 :
1. India’s Act East Policy focusses on the extended neighbourhood in the Asia-Pacific region. The policy which was originally conceived as an economic initiative, has gained political, strategic and cultural dimensions including establishment of institutional mechanisms for dialogue and cooperation.
2. India has upgraded its relations to strategic partnership with Indonesia, Vietnam, Malaysia, Japan, Republic of Korea, Australia, Singapore and Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) and forged close ties with all countries in the Asia-Pacific region.
3. Further, apart from ASEAN, ASEAN Regional Forum (ARF) and East Asia Summit (EAS), India has also been actively engaged in regional fora such as Bay of Bengal Initiative for Multi-Sectoral Technical and Economic Cooperation (BIMSTEC), Asia Cooperation Dialogue (ACD), Mekong Ganga Cooperation (MGC) and Indian Ocean Rim Association (IORA).
4. Act East Policy has placed emphasis on India-ASEAN cooperation in our domestic agenda on infrastructure, manufacturing, trade, skills, urban renewal, smart cities, Make in India and other initiatives. Connectivity projects, cooperation in space, S&T and people-to-people exchanges could become a springboard for regional integration and prosperity.
5. The objective of ‘’Act East Policy” is to promote economic cooperation, cultural ties and develop strategic relationship with countries in the Asia-Pacific region through continuous engagement at bilateral, regional and multilateral levels thereby providing enhanced connectivity to the States of North Eastern Region including Arunanchal Pradesh with other countries in our neighbourhood.
6. The North East of India has been a priority in our Act East Policy. The policy provides an interface between North East India including the state of Arunachal Pradesh and the ASEAN region.
7. Various plans at bilateral and regional levels include steady efforts to develop and strengthen connectivity of Northeast with the ASEAN region through trade, culture, people-topeople contacts and physical infrastructure (road, airport, telecommunication, power, etc.).
8. On the Civilizational front, Buddhist and Hindu links are being energized to develop new contacts and connectivity between people.
9. On Connectivity, special efforts are being made to develop a coherent strategy, particularly for linking ASEAN with North East India. Measures, including building transport infrastructure, encouraging airlines to enhance connectivity in the region, contacts between academic and cultural institutions are underway.
10. India’s economic engagement with ASEAN has been stepped up - regional integration and implementation of projects are priorities. The ASEAN-India Agreement on Trade in Service and Investments has entered into force for India and seven ASEAN countries from 1 July 2015.
11. On strategic issues, India has increased convergence on security interests with key partners both in bilateral and multilateral format. Closer cooperation in combating terrorism, collaborating for peace and stability in the region and promotion of maritime security based on international norms and laws are being pursued.

National Commission to Review the Working of the Constitution:
The National Commission to Review the Working of the Constitution (NCRWC) was set up by a resolution of the Government of India in 20001. The 11-member Commission was headed by M.N. Venkatachaliah, the former Chief Justice of India2. It submitted its report in 2002.

I. TERMS OF REFERENCE OF THE COMMISSION:
According to the terms of reference, the commission was required to examine, in the light of the experience of the past fifty years, as to how far the existing provisions of the Constitution are capable of responding to the needs of efficient, smooth and effective system of governance and socioeconomic development of modern India and to recommend changes, if any. The terms of reference clearly specified that the commission should recommend changes that are required to be made in the Constitution within the framework of parliamentary democracy and without interfering with the ‘basic structure’ or ‘basic features’ of the Constitution.
The commission clarified that its task was to review the working of the Constitution and not to rewrite it and its function was only recommendatory and advisory in nature. It was left to the Parliament to accept or reject any of the recommendations. The commission had no agenda before it. On its own, it identified the eleven areas of study and proposed to examine them. They included the following:
1. Strengthening of the institutions of parliamentary democracy (working of the Legislature, the Executive and the Judiciary; their accountability; problems of administrative, social and economic cost of political instability; exploring the possibilities of stability within the discipline of parliamentary democracy).
2. Electoral reforms; standards in political life.
3. Pace of socio-economic change and development under the Constitution (assurance of social and economic rights: how fair? how fast? how equal?).
4. Promoting literacy; generating employment; ensuring social security; alleviation of poverty.
5. Union-State relations.
6. Decentralization and devolution; empowerment and strengthening of Panchayati Raj Institutions.
7. Enlargement of Fundamental Rights.
8. Effectuation of Fundamental Duties.
9. Effectuation of Directive Principles and achievement of the Preambular objectives of the Constitution.
10. Legal control of fiscal and monetary policies; public audit mechanism.
11. Administrative system and standards in public life.

II. FIFTY YEARS OF WORKING OF THE CONSTITUTION:
The observations made by the Commission on the working of the Constitution from 1950 to 2000 are as follows:
What are our achievements and failures over the 50 years since Independence? 
How have each of the three organs of the State–the Legislature, the Executive and the Judiciary– redeemed the constitutional pledge of ushering in a social revolution? 
Has the dream of the founding fathers for a life of dignity to the vast millions through the process of socioeconomic transformation been realized ? 
What then is the Balance Sheet?

1. Political Accomplishments:
1. India’s democratic base has stabilized as a working federal polity. With the 73rd and 74th Constitutional amendments, the base of democratic debate has widened. There is greater push towards noncentralisation. General Elections have been held with regularity; and transfers of power consequent upon the results of elections have been orderly, peaceful and democratic.
2. The educational qualifications of the Members of Parliament and State Legislatures have shown marked improvements. The Parliament and State Legislatures are increasingly more representative of the composition of society. More and more members of the hitherto backward classes are moving up in the political ladder.

2. Economic Infrastructure–Impressive Performance:
1. There has been marked expansion and diversification of production. New technologies and modern management techniques are increasingly employed. There are marked advances in Science, Technology, Medicine, Engineering and Information Technology.
2. Between 1950–2000, the index of agricultural production increased from 46.2 to 176.8.
3. Between 1960–2000, wheat production went up from 11 million tonnes to 75.6 million tonnes.
4. Between 1960–2000, rice production went up from 35 million tonnes to 89.5 million tonnes.
5. Impressive expansion of industrial and service sectors has taken place.
6. Index of industrial production went up from 7.9 in 1950–51 to 154.7 in 1999–2000.
7. Electricity generation has increased from 5.1 billion KWH in 1950–51 to 480.7 billion KWH in 1999–2000.
8. 6 to 8 per cent annual growth of GNP between 1994–2000 (except in 1997–98) was achieved.
9. Revenues from Information Technology industry have grown from $ 150 million in 1990 to $ 4 billion in 1999.
10. India’s per capita Net National Product (NNP) in 1999–2000 was more than 2.75 times than what it was in 1951.

3. Social Infrastructure– Achievements:
1. Between 1950 to 1998, infant mortality rate have halved to 72 births per 1000 births–down from 146.
2. Life expectancy at birth has grown up from 32 years in 1950–51 to 63 years in 2000.
3. A child born in Kerala today can expect to live longer than a child born in Washington.
4. Life expectancy of women in Kerala is now 75 years.
5. India has put in place an extensive system of Public Health Services and medical network. In 1951, the country had only 725 primary health centers. By 1995, this has increased to more than 1,50,000.
6. The number of primary schools has increased significantly between 1951 and 1995 from 2,10,000 to 5,90,000.
7. Nearly 95 per cent of the villages have a primary school within a walking distance of one kilometer.

4. Political Failures:
1. The main cause and source of politicaldecay is the ineptness of the electoral process which has not been able to keep out criminal, anti-social and undesirable elements from participating in and even dominating the political scene and polluting the electoral and parliamentary processes.
2. Though democratic traditions are stabilizing, however, democracy cannot be said to be an inclusive representative democracy. The pluralism and diversity of India is not reflected in and captured by its democratic institutions; likewise, participation of women in public affairs and decision-making processes is nowhere near proportionate to their numbers.
3. The enormity of the costs of elections and electoral corruption have been having a grievous deleterious effect on national progress and has led to the degradation of political processes to detriment of common good.
4. Political parties, which have a fair share of the criminal elements, handle enormous funds collected ostensibly for meeting party and electoral expenditure. Money-power and criminal elements have contributed to pervasive degeneration of standards in public life and have criminalized politics. This is reflected in the quality of governments and of the governing processes.
5. There are no legal instrumentalities or set of law regulating the conduct of the political parties, legitimacy of fundraising, audit and account requirements and inner-party democracy.
6. National political parties are more divided on the definition of ‘common national purpose’ than ever before; the noble purposes of public life have degenerated than ever before into opportunistic and self-seeking politics of competitive personal gain.
7. ‘Fraternity’, the noble ideal of brotherhood of man, enshrined in the Preamble of the Constitution has remained unrealized. The people of India are more divided amongst themselves than at the time of the country’s independence.
8. There is increasing criminalization and exploitation of the political climate and processes and an increasing criminalspoliticians-bureaucratic nexus.
9. There is crisis of confidence. There is crisis of leadership. Political leaders, owing to narrow partisan and sectarian interests and desire for short-time political gains, are unable even to agree upon broad common national purposes.

5. Economic Failures:
1. The richest top quintile of population has 85 per cent of the income. The poorest quintile has only 1.5 per cent of the country’s income. The second, the third and the fourth quintile from top have respectively 8 per cent, 3.5 per cent and 2 per cent of the income.
2. 260 million people live below the poverty line.

6. Social Failures:
1. India’s maternal mortality rate in 1998 was 407 per 100,000 live births. These levels are more than 100 times the levels found in the West.
2. Some 53 per cent children (almost 60 million) under five remain malnour-ished–nearly twice the levels reported in many parts of sub-Saharan Africa.
3. The proportion of low birth weight babies born in India is 33 per cent. It is only 9 per cent in China and South Korea, 6 per cent in Thailand and 8 per cent in Indonesia.
4. India was a signatory to the Alma Ata Declaration in 1978 that assured ‘health for all’ by the year 2000. Only 42 per cent of the children between 12–23 months are fully immunized - 37 per cent in rural areas and 61 per cent in urban areas. The coverage is shockingly low in Bihar - 11 per cent and in Rajasthan - 17 per cent. 
5. While per capita daily consumption of cereals has improved only marginally from 400 gms in 1950 to about 440 gms in 2000, the per capita pulses (protein intake) have over the 50 years decreased.
6. The promise of social revolution has remained unredeemed. There are 270 million Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes and the measures for their welfare and uplift have not been implemented with sincerity.
7. There are 380 million children below the age of 14. Almost 100 million of them are Dalit children. No effective steps are taken to bring them to the level of the “core-mainstream”.
8. Population control measures in the northern States have not succeeded. Fertility rates in Uttar Pradesh indicate that the State is almost a century behind Kerala.

7. Administrative Failures:
1. Corruption, insensitivity and inefficiency of administration have resulted in extralegal systems and parallel economies and even parallel governments. Bureaucratic corruption, which cause frustration in people in their daily lives, has pushed more and more people into extralegal systems. The mal-administration has resulted in a lack of faith in and disenchantment with institutions of democracy.
2. There is an increasing non-accountability. Corruption has been pervasive. Public interest has suffered.
3. Constitutional protection for the Services under Article 311 has largely been exploited by dishonest officials to protect themselves from the consequences of their wrong-doings.

8. Gender Justice and Equality– Failures:
1. The regional disparities in life expectancy is indicated by the fact that a woman born in Kerala can expect to live 18 years longer than one born in Madhya Pradesh.
2. In most countries life expectancy among women exceeds that of men by about 5 years. In all but a few countries of the world, there are typically 1005 women for every 1000 men. Men outnumber women only in societies where women are specifically and systematically discriminated. In India, there are only 933 women for every 1000 men. This is the phenomenon about ‘missing’ women.
3. Overall representation of women in public services is just 4.9 per cent.
4. Political participation of women indicates that in 1952 there were only 22 women in Lok Sabha against 499 seats (4.41 per cent). In 1991, this increased to 49 seats as against 544 seats (9.02 per cent).
5. Between 1995–2000, out of 503 judges of the High Court, only 15 were women.

9. Judicial System–Failures:
1. Judicial system has not been able to meet even the modest expectations of the society. Its delays and costs are frustrating, its processes slow and uncertain.
2. People are pushed to seek recourse to extra-legal methods for relief.
3. Trial system both on the civil and criminal side has utterly broken down.
On an overall assessment, there are more failures than success stories, making the inference inescapable that the fifty years of the working of the Constitution is substantially a saga of missed opportunities.

III. AREAS OF CONCERN: COMMISSION’S PERCEPTION:
The following are the important areas of concern according to the perception of the Commission6 :
1. There is a fundamental breach of the constitutional faith on the part of Governments and their method of governance lies in the neglect of the people who are the ultimate source of all political authority. Public servants and institutions are not alive to the basic imperative that they are servants of the people meant to serve them. The dignity of the individual enshrined in the Constitution has remained an unredeemed pledge. There is, thus, a loss of faith in the Governments and governance. Citizens see their Governments besieged by uncontrollable events and are losing faith in institutions. Society is unable to cope up with current events.
2. The foremost area of concern is the present nature of the Indian State and its inability to anticipate and provide for the great global forces of change ushered in by the pace of scientific and technological developments.
3. The next and equally important dimension is the increasing cost of government and fiscal deficits which are alarming. In 1947, there was a deficit of Rs. 2 crores in the revenue budget; in 1997–98, it became Rs. 88,937 crores; in 2001–02, it is about Rs. 1,16,000 crores (4.8 per cent of GDP). India is on its way to a debt-trap.
4. There is pervasive impurity of the political climate and of political activity. Criminalisation of politics, politicalcorruption and the politician-criminal-bureaucratic nexus have reached unprecedented levels needing strong systemic changes.
5. Issues of national integrity and security have not received adequate and thoughtful attention. Mechanisms for the assessment of early warning symptoms of social unrest are absent. Mechanisms for adequate and immediate state responses to emergencies and disaster management are wholly inadequate. Administration, as a system for anticipating coming events and planning responses in advance, has failed. It has become un-coordinated and directionless amalgam of different departments often with over-lapping and even mutually conflicting jurisdictions, powers and responsibilities which merely acts as a reaction to problems. There are no clear-cut standards or basis for fixing responsibilities.
6. Though India’s overall record and experience as a working democracy (despite many centrifugal forces) are worthy to mention and though the bases of democratic debate have widened with the 73rd and 74th Constitutional amendments, the working of the institutions of parliamentary democracy, however, have thrown-up serious fault-lines, which might, if unattended, prove destructive of the basic democratic values.
7. There is pervasive misuse of the electoral process and the electoral system is unable to prevent the entry of persons with criminal record into the portal of law-making institutions.
8. The Parliament and the State Legislatures, owing to the inherent weakness of the electoral system, have failed to acquire adequate representative character. The 13th Lok Sabha represents only 27.9 per cent of the total electorate and the Legislature of U.P. represents only 22.2 per cent of electorate respectively.
9. The increasing instability of the elected governments is attributable to opportunistic politics and unprincipled defections. The economic and administrative costs of political instability are unaf-fordably high and their impact on the polity is not clearly comprehended and realized. Though just four Prime Ministers ruled the country for 40 years out of the 54 years of independence and one political party alone was in power for 45 years, however, 1989 onwards the country saw five General Elections to the Lok Sabha. Costs of this political instability are simply colossal.
10. The state of the Indian economy is disturbing. The economy is gradually sinking into a debt-trap. Economic, fiscal and monetary policies, coupled with administrative inefficiency, corruption and wasteful expenditure are increasingly pushing the society into extra-legal systems, crime-syndicates, mob- rule and hoodlum out-fits. Black-money, parallel economy and even parallel governments are the overarching economic and social realities. Legitimate governments will, in due course, find it increasingly difficult to confront them. In course of time these illegal criminal out-fits will dictate terms to the legitimate governments.
11. Rural de-population, urbanization, urban-congestion and social unrest need immediate attention and solutions. Increasing unemployment will prove a serious threat to orderly government.
12. Future of society is increasingly knowledge-based and knowledge-driven. The quality of education and the higher research need urgent repair. The country is engaged in a unilateral and unthinking educational disarmament.
13. System of administration of justice in the country is another area of concern.
14. Criminal justice system is on the verge of collapse. The quality of investigations and prosecutions requires a strong second look. Law’s delay and costs of litigation have become proverbial. Victimology, victim-protection and protection of witnesses in sensitive criminal-trials need institutional arrangements. Recruitment, training, refresher and continuing legal education for lawyers, judges and judicial administrators need immediate attention. The increasing utilization of alternative dispute resolution mechanisms such as mediation, conciliation and arbitration as well as mechanisms of auxiliary adjudicative services need to be stressed.
15. Communal and other inter-group riots in a country like India with its religious, social and cultural diversity cannot be treated as merely law and order problem. They are manifestations of collective behavioural disorders. Legal and administrative measures are required to be taken to remove the insecurity felt by the minorities and for bringing them into the mainstream of the national fabric.
16. The state of social infrastructure is disturbing. There are 380 million children below the age of 14. The arrangements for their education, health and well-being are wholly inadequate both qualitatively and quantitatively. 96.4 per cent of the primary education budget goes for salaries alone.
17. Rates of infant mortality, blindness, maternal mortality, maternal-anemia, child malnutrition and child-immunization, despite significant progress achieved, yet remain at high and disconcerting levels.
18. Public health and hygiene have not received adequate attention. There is alarming increase of infectious diseases such as Tuberculosis, Malaria, Hepatitis, HIV etc.

IV. RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMISSION:
In all, the commission made 249 recommendations. Of them, 58 recommendations involve amendments to the Constitution, 86 involve legislative measures and the remaining 105 recommendations could be accomplished through executive action.
The various recommendations of the commission are mentioned below in an area-wise manner:
1. On Fundamental Rights:
1. The scope of prohibition against discrimination (under Articles 15 and 16) should be extended to include ‘ethnic or social origin, political or other opinion, property or birth’.
2. The freedom of speech and expression (under Article 19) should be expanded to include explicitly ‘the freedom of the press and other media, the freedom to hold opinions and to seek, receive and impart information and ideas’.
3. The following should be added as new Fundamental Rights:
(a) Right against torture, cruelty and inhuman treatment or punishment.
(b) Right to compensation if a person is illegally deprived of his right to life or liberty.
(c) Right to leave and to return to India.
(d) Right to privacy and family life.
(e) Right to rural wage employment for a minimum of 80 days in a year.
(f) Right to access to courts and tribunals and speedy justice.
(g) Right to equal justice and free legal aid8 .
(h) Right to care and assistance and protection (in case of children).
(i) Right to safe drinking water, prevention of pollution, conservation of ecology and sustainable development.
4. The right to education (under Article 21-A) should be enlarged to read as: ‘Every child shall have the right to free education until he completes the age of fourteen years; and in the case of girls and members of the SCs and STs until they complete the age of eighteen years’.
5. Two changes should be made with respect to preventive detention (under Article 22), namely, (i) the maximum period of preventive detention should be six months; and (ii) the advisory board should consist of a chairman and two other members and they should be serving judges of any high court.
6. Sikhism, Jainism and Buddhism should be treated as religions separate from Hinduism and the provisions grouping them together (under Article 25) should be deleted. At present, the word ‘Hindu’ is defined to include these religions also.
7. The protection from judicial review afforded by Article 31-B to the Acts and Regulations specified in the Ninth Schedule should be restricted to only those which relate to 
(i) agrarian reforms, 
(ii) reservations, and 
(iii) the implementation of Directive Principles specified in clause (b) or (c) of Article 39.
8. No suspension of the enforcement of the Fundamental Rights under Articles 17, 23, 24, 25 and 32 in addition to those under Articles 20 and 21 during the operation of a national emergency (under Article 352).

2. On Right to Property:
Article 300-A should be recast as follows:
1. Deprivation or acquisition of property shall be by authority of law and only for a public purpose.
2. There shall be no arbitrary deprivation or acquisition of property.
3. No deprivation or acquisition of agricultural, forest and nonurban homestead land belonging to or customarily used by the SCs and STs shall take place except by authority of law which provides for suitable rehabilitation scheme before taking possession of such land. In brief, a right to ‘suitable rehabilitation’ for the SCs and STs if their land is to be acquired.

3. On Directive Principles:
1. The heading of Part-IV of the Constitution should be amended to read as ‘Directive Principles of State Policy and Action’.
2. A new Directive Principle on control of population should be added.
3. An independent National Education Commission should be set-up every five years.
4. An Inter-Faith Commission should be established to promote inter-religious harmony and social solidarity.
5. There must be a body of high status to review the level of implementation of the Directive Principles.
6. A strategic Plan of Action should be initiated to create a large number of employment opportunities in five years.
7. Implementation of the recommendations contained in the Report of the National Statistical Commission (2001).

4. On Fundamental Duties: 
1. Consideration should be given to the ways and means by which Fundamental Duties could be popularized and made effective.
2. The recommendations of the Justice Verma Committee on operationalisation of Fundamental Duties should be implemented at the earliest.
3. The following new fundamental duties should be included in Article 51-A:
(a) Duty to vote at elections, actively participate in the democratic process of governance and to pay taxes.
(b) To foster a spirit of family values and responsible parenthood in the matter of education, physical and moral well-being of children.
(c) Duty of industrial organizations to provide education to children of their employees.

5. On Parliament and State Legislatures:
1. The privileges of legislators should be defined and delimited for the free and independent functioning of Parliament and state legislatures.
2. Article 105 may be amended to clarify that the immunity enjoyed by members under parliamentary privileges does not cover corrupt acts committed by them in connection with their duties in the House or otherwise. Further, no court would take cognizance of any offence arising out of a member’s action in the House without prior sanction of the Speaker / Chairman. Article 194 may also be similarly amended in relation to the members of state legislatures.
3. The domiciliary requirement for eligibility to contest elections to Rajya Sabha from the concerned state should be maintained. This is essential to ensure the federal character of the Rajya Sabha.
4. The MP local area development scheme should be discontinued.
5. The Election Commission should be empowered to identify and declare the various offices under the central and state governments to be ‘offices of profit’ for the purposes of being chosen, and for being, a member of the appropriate legislature.
6. Immediate steps be taken to set up a Nodal Standing Committee on National Economy.
7. A Standing Constitution Committee of the two Houses of Parliament for a priori scrutiny of constitutional amendment proposals should be set up.
8. A new Legislation Committee of Parliament to oversee and coordinate legislative planning should be constituted.
9. The existing Parliamentary Committees on Estimates, Public Undertakings and Subordinate Legislation may not be continued.
10. The Parliamentarians must voluntarily place themselves open to public scrutiny through a parliamentary ombudsman.
11. The State Legislatures with less than 70 members should meet for at least 50 days in a year and other State Legislatures for at least 90 days. Similarly, the minimum number of days for sittings of Rajya Sabha and Lok Sabha should be fixed at 100 and 120 days respectively.
12. A Study Group outside Parliament for study of procedural reforms should be set up.

6. On Executive and Administration:
1. In case of hung Parliament, the Lok Sabha may elect the leader of the House. He may then be appointed as the prime minister by the president. The same procedure could be followed at the state level also.
2. A motion of no-confidence against a prime minister must be accompanied by a proposal of alternative leader to be voted simultaneously. This is called as the ‘system of constructive vote of no confidence’.
3. For a motion of no-confidence to be brought out against the government, at least 20 per cent of the total number of members of the House should give notice.
4. The practice of having oversized Council of Ministers should be prohibited by law. A ceiling on the number of Ministers in any State or the Union government be fixed at the maximum of 10 per cent of the total strength of the popular house of the legislature.
5. The practice of creating a number of political offices with the position, perks and privileges of a minister should be discouraged. Their number should be limited to 2 per cent of the total strength of the lower house.
6. The Constitution should provide for appointment of Lokpal keeping the prime minister outside its purview and the institution of lokayuktas in the states.
7. Lateral entry into government jobs above joint secretary level should be allowed.
8. Article 311 should be amended to ensure not only protection to the honest public servants but penalisation to dishonest ones.
9. The questions of personnel policy including placements, promotions, transfers and fast-track advancements should be managed by autonomous Civil Service Boards constituted under statutory provisions.
10. Officials, before starting their career, in addition to the taking of an oath of loyalty to the Constitution, should swear to abide by the principles of good governance.
11. Right to information should be guaranteed and the traditional insistence on secrecy should be discarded. In fact, there should be an oath of transparency in place of an oath of secrecy. 
12. Public Interest Disclosure Acts (which are popularly called the Whistle-blower Acts) may be enacted to fight corruption and mal-administration. 
13. A law should be enacted to provide for forfeiture of benami property of corrupt public servants as well as non-public servants.

7. On Centre-State and Inter-State Relations:
1. The Inter-State Council Order of 1990 may clearly specify the matters that should form the parts of consultations. 
2. Management of disasters and emergencies (both natural and manmade) should be included in the List III (Concurrent List) of the Seventh Schedule. 
3. A statutory body called the Inter-State Trade and Commerce Commission should be established. 
4. The president should appoint the governor of a state only after consultation with the chief minister of that state.
5. Article 356 should not be deleted, but it must be used sparingly and only as a remedy of the last resort. 
6. The question whether the ministry in a state has lost the confidence of the assembly or not should be tested only on the floor of the House. The Governor should not be allowed to dismiss the ministry, so long as it enjoys the confidence of the House. 
7. Even without the state being under a proclamation of emergency, President’s Rule may be continued if elections cannot be held. Article 356 should be amended to this effect. 
8. The State Assembly should not be dissolved before the proclamation issued under Article 356 has been laid before Parliament. Article 356 should be amended to ensure this.
9. River water disputes between States and / or the Centre should be heard and disposed by a bench of not less than three judges and if necessary, a bench of five judges of the Supreme Court for the final disposal of the suit. 
10. Parliament should replace the River Boards Act of 1956 with another comprehensive enactment after consultation with all the states. 
11. When the state bill is reserved for consideration of the President, there should be a time-limit (say of three months) within which the President should take a decision whether to give his assent or to return the bill.

8. On Judiciary:
1. A National Judicial Commission under the Constitution should be established to recommend the appointment of judges of the Supreme Court. It should comprise the chief justice of India (as chairman), two senior most Judges of the Supreme Court, the Union law minister and one person nominated by the president. 
2. A committee of the National Judicial Commission should examine complaints of deviant behaviour of the Supreme Court and high court judges. 
3. The retirement age of the judges of high courts and Supreme Court should be increased to 65 and 68 respectively. 
4. No court other than the Supreme Court and the High Courts should have the power to punish for contempt of itself.
5. Except the Supreme Court and the High Courts, no other court should have the power to declare the Acts of Parliament and State Legislatures as being unconstitutional or beyond legislative competence and so ultra-vires. 
6. A National Judicial Council and Judicial Councils in States should be set up for the preparation of plans and annual budget proposals. 
7. In the Supreme Court and the High Courts, judgements should ordinarily be delivered within 90 days from the conclusion of the case. 
8. An award of exemplary costs should be given in appropriate cases of abuse of process of law.
9. Each High Court should prepare a strategic plan for timebound clearance of arrears in courts within its jurisdiction. No case to remain pending for more than one year. 
10. The system of plea-bargaining should be introduced as part of the process of decriminalization. 
11. The hierarchy of the subordinate courts in the country should be brought down to a two-tier of subordinate judiciary under the High Court.

9. On Pace of Socio-Economic Change and Development:
1. A way could and should be found to bring a reasonable number of SCs, STs and BCs on to the benches of the Supreme Court and high courts. 
2. Social policy should aim at enabling the SCs, STs and BCs and with particular attention to the girls to compete on equal terms with the general category. 
3. Appropriate new institutions should be established to ensure that the resources earmarked for the weaker sections are optimally used. 
4. The Citizens’ Charters be prepared by every service providing department / agency to enumerate the entitlements of the citizens specifically those of the SCs, STs and other deprived classes. 
5. Reservation for SCs, STs and BCs should be brought under a statute covering all aspects of reservation including setting up of Arakshan Nyaya Adalats to adjudicate upon all disputes pertaining to reservation. 
6. Residential schools for SCs, STs and BCs should be established in every district in the country. 
7. All tribal areas governed by the Fifth Schedule of the Constitution should be transferred to the Sixth Schedule. Other tribal areas should also be brought under the Sixth Schedule. 
8. Special courts exclusively to try offences under the SCs and STs (Prevention of Atrocities) Act, 1989, should be established.
9. Prevention of untouchability requires, inter alia, effective punitive action under the Protection of Civil Rights Act, 1955.
10. The Employment of Manual Scavengers and Construction of Dry Latrines (Prohibition) Act, 1993, should be strictly enforced. 
11. Steps should be taken for improvement of educational standards as well as for increasing the political representation of the minority communities. 
12. A fully empowered National Authority for the Liberation and Rehabilitation of bonded labour should be set up. Similar authorities should also be established at the state level. 
13. As regards women, action covering reservation, development, empowerment, health and protection against violence should be taken.

10. On Decentralisation (Panchayats and Municipalities):
1. The Eleventh and Twelfth Schedules of the Constitution should be restructured in a manner that creates a separate fiscal domain for panchayats and municipalities. 
2. State panchayat council should be established under the chairmanship of the chief minister. 
3. Panchayats and Municipalities should be categorically declared to be ‘institutions of self-government’ and exclusive functions be assigned to them. For this purpose, Articles 243-G and 243-W should be suitably amended. 
4. The Election Commission of India should have the power to issue directions to the State Election Commission for the discharge of its functions. The State Election Commission should submit its annual or special reports to the Election Commission of India and to the Governor. This requires the amendment of Articles 243-K and 243-ZA. 
5. Article 243-E should be amended to the effect that a reasonable opportunity of being heard shall be given to a Panchayat before it is dissolved. 
6. To ensure uniformity in the practice relating to audit of accounts, the CAG of India should be empowered to conduct the audit or lay down accounting standards for Panchayats. 
7. Whenever a Municipality is superseded, a report stating the grounds for such dissolution should be placed before the State Legislature. 
8. All provisions regarding qualifications and disqualifications for elections to local authorities should be consolidated in a single law. 
9. The functions of delimitation, reservation and rotation of seats should be vested in a Delimitation Commission and not in the State Election Commission. 
10. The concept of a distinct and separate tax domain for municipalities should be recognized.

11. On Institutions in North East India:
1. Efforts are to be made to give all the States in this region the opportunities provided under the 73rd and 74th Constitutional Amendments. However, this should be done with due regard to the unique political traditions of the region. 
2. The subjects given under the Sixth Schedule and those mentioned in the Eleventh Schedule could be entrusted to the Autonomous District Councils (ADCs). 
3. Traditional forms of governance should be associated with self-governance because of the present dissatisfaction. 
4. A National Immigration Council should be set up to examine a range of issues including review of the Citizenship Act, the Illegal Migrants Determination by Tribunal Act, the Foreigners Act and so on. 
5. As regards Nagaland, the Naga Councils should be replaced by elected representatives of various Naga society groups with an intermediary tier at the district level. 
6. As regards Assam, the Sixth Schedule should be extended to the Bodoland Autonomous Council and other Autonomous Councils be upgraded to Autonomous Development Councils. 
7. As regards Meghalaya, a tier of village governance should be created for a village or a group of villages in the Autonomous District Councils. 
8. As regards Tripura, the changes which may be made in respect of other Autonomous Councils should also apply in respect of the Autonomous District Councils. 
9. As regards Mizoram, an intermediary elected tier should be developed at the district level in areas not covered by the Sixth Schedule. 
10. As regards Manipur, the provisions of the Sixth Schedule should be extended to hill districts of the State.

12. On Electoral Processes:
1. Any person charged with any offence punishable with imprisonment for a maximum term of five years or more, should be disqualified for being chosen as or for being a member of Parliament or Legislature of a State. 
2. Any person convicted for any heinous crime like murder, rape, smuggling, dacoity, etc., should be permanently debarred from contesting for any political office. 
3. Criminal cases against politicians pending before Courts either for trial or in appeal must be disposed of speedily, if necessary, by appointing Special Courts. 
4. The election petitions should also be decided by special courts. In the alternative, special election benches may be constituted in the High Courts and earmarked exclusively for the disposal of election petitions and election disputes. 
5. Any system of State funding of elections bears a close nexus to the regulation of working of political parties by law and to the creation of a foolproof mechanism under law with a view to implementing the financial limits strictly. Therefore, proposals for State funding should be deferred till these regulatory mechanisms are firmly in position. 
6. Candidates should not be allowed to contest election simultaneously for the same office from more than one constituency. 
7. The election code of conduct should be given the sanctity of law and its violation should attract penal action. 
8. The Commission while recognizing the beneficial potential of the system of run off contest electing the representative winning on the basis of 50 per cent plus one vote polled, as against the present first-past-the-post system, for a more representative democracy, recommends that the Government and the Election Commission of India should examine this issue of prescribing a minimum of 50 per cent plus one vote for election in all its aspects. 
9. An independent candidate who loses election three times consecutively should be permanently debarred from contesting election to the same office. 
10. The minimum number of valid votes polled should be increased to 25 per cent from the current 16.67 per cent as a condition for the deposit not being forfeited. 
11. The issue of eligibility of non-Indian born citizens or those whose parents or grandparents were citizens of India to hold high offices in the realm such as President, Vice-President, Prime Minister and Chief Justice of India should be examined in depth through a political process after a national dialogue. 
12. The Chief Election Commissioner and the other Election Commissioners should be appointed on the recommendation of a body consisting of the Prime Minister, Leader of the Opposition in the Lok Sabha, Leader of the Opposition in the Rajya Sabha, the Speaker of the Lok Sabha and the Deputy Chairman of the Rajya Sabha. Similar procedure should be adopted in the case of appointment of State Election Commissioners.

13. On Political Parties:
1. A comprehensive law regulating the registration and functioning of political parties or alliances of parties should be made. The proposed law should
(a) provide that political party or alliance should keep its doors open to all citizens irrespective of any distinctions of caste, community or the like. 
(b) make it compulsory for the parties to maintain accounts of the receipt of funds and expenditure in a systematic and regular way. 
(c) make it compulsory for the political parties requiring their candidates to declare their assets and liabilities at the time of filing their nomination. 
(d) provide that no political party should provide ticket to a candidate if he was convicted by any court for any criminal offence or if the courts have framed criminal charges against him. 
(e) specifically provide that if any party violates the above provision , the candidate involved should be liable to be disqualified and the party deregistered and derecognized.
2. The Election Commission should progressively increase the threshold criterion for eligibility for recognition so that the proliferation of smaller political parties is discouraged.  
3. A comprehensive legislation providing for regulation of contributions to the political parties and towards election expenses should be enacted by consolidating such laws. This new law should: 
(a) aim at bringing transparency into political funding; 
(b) permit corporate donations within higher prescribed limits; 
(c) make donations up to a specified limit tax exempt; 
(d) make both donors and donees of political funds accountable; 
(e) provide that audited political party accounts should be published yearly; and 
(f) provide for de-recognition of the party and enforcement of penalties for filing false election returns.

14. On Anti-Defection Law:
The provisions of the Tenth Schedule of the Constitution should be amended to provide the following:
1. All persons defecting (whether individually or in groups) from the party or the alliance of parties, on whose ticket they had been elected, must resign from their parliamentary or assembly seats and must contest fresh elections. 
2. The defectors should be debarred to hold any public office of a minister or any other remunerative political post for at least the duration of the remaining term of the existing legislature or until the next elections whichever is earlier. 
3. The vote cast by a defector to topple a government should be treated as invalid. 
4. The power to decide questions regarding disqualification on ground of defection should vest in the Election Commission instead of in the Speaker / Chairman of the House concerned.

V. EARLIER EFFORTS TO REVIEW THE CONSTITUTION:
Even before the appointment of this Commission in 2000, certain attempts were already made to review the working of the Constitution. The Commission itself has summarized those attempts in the following way:
1. There was nothing entirely new in the effort at reviewing the working of our Constitution. The debate had continued right from the first decade of the life of the Constitution. Also, every amendment had been an occasion for review. But, in the half-a-century and more since the Constitution came into force, whereas as many as eighty-five amendments have been instituted, there has been (till the setting up of the National Commission to Review the Working of the Constitution) no comprehensive and transparent official exercise to review the working of the Constitution in its entirety with a view to evaluating its achievements and failures in fulfilling the objectives of the Constitution in the context of experience gained, and for future requirements perceived.

2. After the Constitution came into force, within two years, it was required to be amended. In the course of his speech on the Constitution (First Amendment) Bill, 1951, on 2 June 1951 Nehru once again repeated his views as to the need for the Constitution to be amenable to amendment. On this occasion, his words were trenchant and unsparing. He said: “A Constitution which is unchanging and static, it does not matter how good it is, but as a Constitution it is past its use. It is in its old age already and gradually approaching its death. A Constitution to be living must be growing; must be adaptable; must be flexible; must be changeable... Therefore, it is a desirable and a good thing for people to realize that this very fine Constitution that we have fashioned after years of labour, is good in so far as it goes, but as society changes as conditions change, we amend it in the proper way”.

3. Four years later, as an experienced Prime Minister with prolonged firsthand knowledge of the efficacy of the fundamental law of the land, he held the same view. Speaking on the Constitution (Fourth Amendment) Bill, 1955 Nehru said: “After all, the Constitution is meant to facilitate the working of the Government and the administrative and other structures of this country. It is meant to be not something that is static and which has a static form in a changing world, but something which has something dynamic in it, which takes cognizance of the dynamic nature of modern conditions, modern society.”

4. In the years that followed the Fourth Amendment, the Constitution has been amended 81 times. The Union and the State Governments and Parliament faced the Supreme Court over fundamental rights issues: freedom of expression visa-vis national integrity; personal liberty visa-vis political stability; special treatment for some segments of society visa-vis abstract equality for all; property rights vis-a-vis social revolution needs etc. Questions also arose whether the power of constitutional amendment was complete, unrestrained and unlimited and whether there were limits to the power of judicial review of constitutional amendments.

5. In the period 1950 to 1967, Parliament and most State Assemblies had preponderant Congress majorities. General Elections in 1967 were followed by the formation of nonCongress coalitions in a number of States in the northern region of the country. Certain issues pertaining to UnionState relations arose during this period directly from the functioning of mechanisms and processes under the Constitution. An Administrative Reforms Commission was constituted by the Government of India to examine administrative aspects of Union-State relations.

6. In the period following the fourth General Election, the phenomenon of unprincipled defections for money or ministerships etc. came to the fore: legislators changing their party allegiance again and again in utter disregard of all moral and political proprieties, constituency choice and public opinion. Wide-spread concern about the problem was mirrored in Parliament, and led to a unanimous resolution in the Lok Sabha on 8 December 1967. The resolution read: “This House is of opinion that a high-level Committee consisting of representatives of political parties and constitutional experts be set up immediately by Government to consider the problem of legislators changing their allegiance from one party to another and their frequent crossing of the floor in all its aspects, and make recommendations in this regard.”

7. Known subsequently as the Y.B. Chavan Committee, after the then Union Home Minister who was the Chairman of the Committee, this body produced a valuable report which addressed a variety of issues germane to the handling of the problem of defections which had basic implications with reference to the working of constitutional machinery and connected statutory and procedural instrumentalities.

8. The 25th anniversary of the coming into force of the Constitution of the world’s largest democratic republic occurred, ironically, in the year in which the Emergency was clamped on the nation in an atmosphere of burgeoning national unrest. It was in this context that the first concerted initiative towards a review and revision of the Constitution was undertaken in 1975. At the AICC Session in December, 1975 - the ‘Kamagata Maru Session’ -a resolution on the political situation stated: “If the misery of the poor and vulnerable sections of our society is to be alleviated, vast and far-reaching changes have to be effected in our socio-economic structure... The Congress urges that our Constitution be thoroughly examined in order to ascertain if the time has not come to make adequate alterations to it so that it may continue as a living document.”

9. A document titled ‘A Fresh Look at Our Constitution - Some Suggestions’ surfaced at this time and was circulated but, after the recommendations contained in it had drawn stringent criticism from diverse quarters, it was not pursued. Amidst tenacious advocacy about the need for constitutional change, particularly after the Kamagata Maru Session of the Indian National Congress, the then Congress President, D.K. Borooah appointed, on 26 February 1976, a Committee “to study the question of amendment of the Constitution.. in the light of experience.” The twelve-member Committee, headed by Sardar Swaran Singh, submitted “tentative proposals” to the Congress President in April 1976 and these were then circulated among a select few. The then Chairman of the Law Commission of India, Justice P.B. Gajendragadkar wrote to the Prime Minister that while amendment to the Constitution was necessary to expedite the socio-economic revolution, “ad-hocism is undesirable and adoption of extremist doctrinaire positions is irrelevant and inadvisable”. He advised the Prime Minister “to appoint a high powered committee to research and discuss the problem in depth for a dedicated and comprehensive effort.”

10. The Swaran Singh Committee Report stated that its recommendations had been made with the background of the tentative proposals circulated earlier to Congress Chief Ministers and Pradesh Congress Committees, the views of Bar Associations of the Supreme Court and all the High Courts, comments in the Press and in public and memoranda and opinions received from individuals, professional bodies etc. It said: “.....the Committee has kept before it certain important objectives. Our Constitution has functioned without any serious impediment during the past 26 years or so. While this is so, difficulties have been thrown up from time to time in the interpretation of some of its provisions, more particularly when they concern the right of Parliament to be the most authentic and effective instrument to give expression and content to the sovereign will of the people”. The Committee also declared that: “The Parliamentary system is best suited to our country, and it is unnecessary to abandon it in favour of the Presidential or any other system. In a vast country like India, with the kind of regional diversity as we have, the Parliamentary system preserves best the unity and integrity of the country and ensures greater responsiveness to the voice of the people.”

11. The Committee made a series of recommendations on a wide range of issues including the Preamble; the Directive Principles; the constituent power of Parliament to amend the Constitution; the power of judicial review; article 276; service matters; industrial and labour disputes; matters relating to revenue, land reform, procurement and distribution of food grains and other essential commodities; Election matters; Article 227; disqualification for membership of a house of Parliament or either house of the State Legislature; article 352 and Union State Coordination. The Committee also undertook to make separate proposals for the deletion of some provisions of the Constitution which, it observed, had become “obsolete or redundant.”

12. Reacting to the Swaran Singh Committee and its report as published, Justice P.B. Gajendragadkar, then still the Chairman of the Law Commission, in a letter to Smt. Indira Gandhi, reiterated his view that the amendment to the fundamental law of the land should not have been left to a party committee and that the modality could, advisedly, have been a committee of experts to hear all parties and persons. He said, further, that the Committee appointed by Congress President Borooah had “worked in a hurry, discussed issues in a casual manner and based its recommendations mainly on political considerations.”

13. When the Forty-Second Amendment Bill was prepared, the Statement of Objects and Reasons echoed some of Jawaharlal Nehru’s words. “A Constitution to be living must be growing”, it declared. “If the impediments to the growth of the Constitution are not removed, the Constitution will suffer virtual atrophy.” The Prime Minister, in her speech in the Lok Sabha on 27 October 1976, said that the purpose of the Bill was “to remedy the anomalies that have long been noticed and to overcome obstacles put up by economic and political vested interests,” and that the Bill was “responsive to the aspirations of the people, and reflects the realities of the present time and the future”.

14. After the change of Government, following general elections in 1977, the then Prime Minister, Morarji Desai appointed a Committee of Members of Parliament as a forum for considering substantive changes in the amendments brought about during the Emergency. Subsequently, the Prime Minister set up a Sub-Committee of the Cabinet for the same purpose. Issues germane to the 42nd Amendment were subject matter of voluminous expression of opinion by jurists, parliamentarians, editors and professional bodies. But, essentially, the effort focused on the correction of the imbalance in the Constitution caused by some provisions of the Forty Second Amendment.

15. The need was felt for a comprehensive review of UnionState relations following the experience gained in the period after the General Elections of 1977 which had resulted in non Congress governments at the Centre and in several major States in the north, but governments formed by the Congress in the southern States. In 1983, a Commission was constituted under the chairmanship of Justice R.S. Sarkaria with fairly wide-ranging terms of reference. These included:
“(i) The Commission will examine and review the working of the existing arrangements between the Union and the States in regard to powers, functions and responsibilities in all spheres and recommend such changes or other measures as may be appropriate;
(ii) In examining and reviewing the working of existing arrangements between the Union and States and making recommendations as to changes and measures needed, the Commission will keep in view the social and economic developments that have taken place over the years and have due regard to the scheme and framework of the Constitution which the founding fathers have so sedulously designed to protect the independence and ensure the unity and integrity of the country which is of paramount importance for promoting the welfare of the people.”

16. There were also some other especially note-worthy studies of particular problems in the political system. Deep concern had been voiced relative to flaws in the electoral process. This had occasioned a Joint Parliamentary Committee on Amendments to Election Law, which submitted its report in 1972. The Committee for Democracy set up by Loknayak Jaya Prakash Narayan had also studied the subject. Various aspects of electoral reforms were reviewed by a Cabinet Sub Committee appointed in 1977 and another in 1982. In 1990, the Government of India constituted a Committee under the Chairmanship of the then Union Law Minister Dinesh Goswami with Members drawn from different political parties. The Report of the Committee contained a series of recommendations, most of which were accepted for implementation.

17. A Committee to examine issues related to State Funding of Elections was constituted in May 1998, known as the Indrajit Gupta Committee after that outstanding Parliamentarian and leader who was its Chairman. Although the Committee had a relatively limited compass of study, its observations are noteworthy and comprise valuable supplementary material pertaining to the process of elections.

18. Various Reports of the Law Commission of India provide a wealth of insights into the working of the machinery of the Constitution. The 170th Report of the Law Commission, on Reform of Election Laws, presented in May 1999, considers radical approaches seeking to improve the system of elections - the very sheet anchor of Parliamentary Democracy under the Constitution.

19. The most significant of the non-political civil society efforts was the seminar organised by 15 national institutions in 1992 and the committee appointed by the India International Centre to review the working of the Constitution. The committee which had the senior Congress leader and former cabinet minister, Dr. Karan Singh as the Chairman and included among its members two of the members of this Commission, presented its report to the President and others. Concluding recommendation of the committee was that of a Review Commission being appointed.

20. The National Agenda for Governance issued by the National Democratic Alliance as the NDA Election Manifesto before the last general elections contained a pledge that a Commission would be appointed to review the Constitution in the light of its working for fifty years. The Pledge was affirmed in the President’s address to Parliament and was followed by the appointment of this Commission in February 2000.

CONSTITUTION OF INDIA:

The Constitution of India is the supreme law of India. The document lays down the framework that demarcates fundamental political code, structure, procedures, powers, and duties of government institutions and sets out fundamental rights, directive principles, and the duties of citizens. It is the longest written national constitution in the world.

The Constitution of India imparts constitutional supremacy (not parliamentary supremacy, since it was created by a constituent assembly rather than Parliament) and was adopted by its people with a declaration in its preamble.Parliament cannot override the constitution.

The Constitution was adopted by the Constituent Assembly of India on 26 November 1949 and became effective on 26 January 1950. The constitution replaced the Government of India Act 1935 as the country's fundamental governing document, and the Dominion of India became the Republic of India. To ensure constitutional autochthony, its framers repealed prior acts of the British parliament in Article 395. India celebrates its constitution on 26 January as Republic Day.

The constitution declares India a sovereign, socialist, secular, and democratic republic, assures its citizens justice, equality, and liberty, and endeavours to promote fraternity. The original 1950 constitution is preserved in a nitrogen-filled case at the Parliament House in New Delhi.

The Constitution of India or the Constitution of the Republic of India came in effect on January 26, 1950 and is the longest written constitution of any independent nation in the world. It contains 22 Parts 395 articles and 12 schedules. It has a total of 117,369 words in its English language version.

History of the Constitution of India:
At the end of World War II in Europe on May 9, 1945, a new government came to power in the United Kingdom. This government announced to convene a constituent drafting body in India. A team of ministers, called the Cabinet Mission, were sent to India to find solution to the question of India's independence.
The Cabinet Mission discussed the framework and the procedure to be followed the drafting body. With India's independence, the Constituent Assembly became a fully sovereign body and they began the working from 9 December 1947.
The Assembly had members belonging to different communities, regions and even from different political persuasions of India. Dr. Rajendra Prasad was the elected president and B.R. Ambedkar, the chairman of the Drafting Committee.
Over a period of 2 years, 11 months and 18 days, before submitting the final copy of the Constitution, the Constituent Assembly met for 166 days and the sessions were always open to the press and the public.

Features of the Constitution of India:
It has been extensively drawn from Western legal traditions in enunciation of the principles of liberal democracy. The principles of the Constitution reflect aspirants to end the inequities of traditional social relations and to enhance the social welfare of the population. Since the enactment, the constitution has always fostered for a steady concentrate of power to the central government, especially to Prime Minister Office (PMO).

Features of the Indian Constitution:
The Indian constitution is unique in its content and spirit. The salient features ofthe constitution are as follows:
Lengthiest written Constitution
Blend of Rigidity and Flexibility
Federal system with unitary features
Parliamentary form of Government
Independent judiciary
Single citizenship
Emergency provision

Structure of the Indian Constitution:
The Indian Constitution originally consisted of 395 Art, 22 parts, 8 Schedules. But after the Constitution 104th Amendment Act, 2003, the Indian Constitution Consists of 448 Art, 25 parts, 12 Schedules.

Preamble:
The preamble to the constitution is based on the “ objective resolution” drafted and moved by Pandit Nehru and adopted by constituent assembly. The Preamble highlights few fundamental values and guiding principles on which the Constitution of India is based. It serves as the guiding light for both, the Constitution as well as the judges who interpret the Constitution in its light. The opening few words of the Preamble - "We, the people" - signifies that the power is vested in the hands of the people of India. The Preamble is as follows:
“We THE PEOPLE OF INDIA, having solemnly resolved to constitute India in to a SOVERIGN SOCIALIST SECULAR DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC and to secure to all its citizen:
JUSTICE, social, Economic, and Political; LIBERTY of thought, expression, belief, faith and worship; EQUALITY of status and of opportunity;and to promote among them all, FRATERNITY assuring the dignity of the individual and the unity and integrity of the nation; 
In our Constituent Assembly, this 26th November, 1949, do hereby adopt, enact and give to ourselves this constitution.”

Initially the preamble was not the part of the Constitution of India but the Supreme Court, in the case of 'Kesavananda Bharati v. State of Kerala' found it to be part of the Constitution and can be used in interpret ambiguous areas of the Constitution. The words "SOCIALIST" and "SECULAR" were introduced in 42nd amendment act 1976.

Purpose of the Preamble: 
The preamble to the constitution is a key to open the minds of the makers and shows the general purpose for which they made the several provisions in the constitution. Preamble serves the following purposes:
1. It discloses the source of the constitution.
2. It lays down the date of the commencement of the constitution.
3. It set out the rights and freedoms which the people of India wished to secure for themselves.
4. It declares the nature of the government.

Terms of Preamble:
Sovereign: "Sovereign" means supreme or independent. The country is both, internally as well as externally sovereign. Externally it is free from any foreign power and internally it exercises a free government directly elected by the people and makes laws that govern the people.

Socialist: The word was added by the 42nd amendment act of 1976. It implies to social and economic equality. Social equality means there is no discrimination on the grounds of caste, color, creed, sex, religion, language, etc. Each one enjoys equal status and opportunities. By economic equality it means that the government will endeavour for equal distribution of wealth and to provide a decent standard of living for all, hence a committment in forming a welfare state. Abolition of Untouchability and Zamindari, the Equal Wages Act and
the Child Labour Prohibition Act were few steps taken by the government in this context.

Secular: The word "Secular" was inserted by the 42nd amendment act of 1976. Secular implies equality of all religions and religious tolerance. No state in India have an official state religion. Anybody can preach, practice and propagate any religion of his or her choice. In the eyes of law all citizens are equal irrespective of their religious beliefs. No religious instruction is imparted in government schools or government-aided schools.

Democratic: "Democratic" means that the government of all levels are elected by the people through a system of universal adult franchise. Every citizen irrespective of caste, creed, color, sex, religion or education who is 18 years of age and above is entitled to vote, if not debarred by law.

Republic - The term "Republic" means that the head of the state is elected, directly or indirectly, for a fixed tenure. The President of India is elected by Electoral College for a fixed period of five years.

Nature of Indian Constitution:
The Constitution is of two kinds:
1. Unitary: In a Unitary Constitutions the powers of the Government are centralized in one Government v.z. the States or Provinces are Subordinates to the Centre.
2. Federal: In Federal Constitution, there is a division of Powers between the federal and the State Government and both are independent in their own spheres. The American Constitution is universally regarded as an example of the Federal Constitution.

Characteristics of a federal Constitution:
1. A Written Constitution: For a federal Constitution it is Mandatory that there should be a written Constitution.
2. Dual Government: In case of federal constitution, there is system of dual government one at centre and another at state.
3. Supremacy of Constitutions: For a federal Constitution there should be supremacy of the Constitution. At the time of the exercise of power by three organs of the Govt. i.e. legislative, executive and Judiciary, all functions are Subordinated and Controlled by the Constitution.
4. Distribution of Powers: Federalism means the distribution of powers of the State among a Number of Co-ordinate bodies each originating in and controlled by the Constitution
5. Rigidity:- Rigidity is one of the Basic essential of a federal Constitution. It highly depends on the Process of amendment.
6. Independent Judiciary: There should be an independent judiciary having authority on other organs. In a federal Constitution the courts (Judiciary) has the final power to interpret the  Constitution. Thus it can be concluded that the Judiciary is the "Guardian of the Constitution".
Conclusion: Finally it can be said that the Indian Constitution is neither Purely federal nor purely unitary but a Unique Combination of Both aspects.

Peculiar feature of Indian Constitution:
Mode of formation
Position of the state
Citizenship
Residuary power
The lengthiest Constitution in the world.

Meaning of State: 
According to Article 12 the State includes:-
The Government and parliament of India
The Government and legislature of each of the states.
All local and other authorities: Within the territory of India and under the control of the Government of India
All the fundamental rights are available against the state with a few exception.

Fundamental Rights in the Constitution:
The aim of Fundamental Rights is that certain elementary rights such as right to life, liberty, freedom of speech and freedom of faith and so on should be regarded as inviolable under all circumstances and that the shifting majority in legislatures of the country should not have a free hand in interfering with fundamental rights. Fundamental right is called the Magna Carta of India.

Rights to Equality:
a. Equality before law-Article 14.
b. Prohibition of discrimination on the grounds of religion race, caste, sex or place of Birth Article 15.
c. Equality of opportunity in matters of public employment, Article 16.
d. Abolition of untouchability Article 17
e. Abolition of titles, Article 18.

Equality before Law:
Article 14 – says that “the State shall not deny to any person equality before the law or the equal protection of the laws within the territory of India.”  It uses two expressions: (1) “Equality before the law; and (2) Equal Protection of the laws

Equality before law: 
This concept is taken from British Constitution. The concept of equality does not mean absolute equality among human beings which is physically no possible to achieve. It is a concept implying absence of any special privilege by reason of birth, Creed or the like in favour of any individual, and also the equal subject of all individuals and classes to the ordinary law of the land. In the words of Dr.Jennings- “Equality before the law” means that among equals the law should be equal and should be equally administered, that like should be treated alike.

Rule of law:
The guarantee of „equality before the law‟ is an aspect of what Dicey Calls the “rule of law” in England. It means that no man is above the law and that every person, whatever be his rank or conditions, is subject to the jurisdiction of ordinary courts. "Dicey the Rule of Law has three distinct meaning"  (1) Supremacy of the law (2) Equality before the flaw (3) The Constitution is the result of the ordinary law of the land.

Equal Protection of the Laws:
This concept is taken from American constitution. This has been interpreted to mean subjection to equal law, applying to all in the same circumstances. It only means that all persons similarly circumstance shall be treated alike both in the privileges conferred and liabilities imposed by the law equal law should be applied to all in the same situation and there should be no discrimination between one person and another. The words “any person” in Article 14 of the constitution denotes that the guarantee of the equal protection of laws is available to any person which includes any company or association or body of individuals. The protection of Article 14 extends to both citizens and non-citizens and to natural persons as well as legal persons. The equality before the law is guaranteed to all without regard to race, colour or nationality. Corporations being juristic persons are also entitled to the benefit of Article 14.

Test of Reasonable classification:
While Article 14 forbids class legislation; it permits reasonable classification of persons, objects and transactions by the legislature for the purpose of achieving specific ends. But classification must not be arbitrary, artificial or evasive”. It must always rest upon some real and substantial distinction bearing a just and reasonable relation to the object sought to be achieved by the legislature, classification to be reasonable must fulfill the following two conditions –
1. the classification must be founded on an “intelligible differentia” which distinguishes persons or things that are grouped together from others left out of the group.
2. the differentia must have a rational relation to the object sought to be achieved by the Act. K.Thimmappa v. Chairman Central Board of Directors SBI and Ram Krishna Dalmia vs. J. Tandulkar

New Concept of Equality: Protection against arbitrariness: 
In E.P.Royappa v. State of Tamil Nadu the new concept of equality in the following words – “Equality is a dynamic concept with many aspects and dimensions and it cannot be described, Cabined and confined” within traditional limits from a positivistic point of view, equality is antithesis to arbitrariness. In fact equality and arbitrariness are sworn enemies, one belong to the rule of law in a republic while the other, to the whim and caprice of an absolute monarch. Where an act is arbitrary, it is implicit in it that it is unequal both according to political logic and constitutional law and is therefore violative of Article 14.

Exceptions to the equality before law- Article 361 of the Constitution permits the following exceptions to this rule –
The President or the Governor of a State shall not be answerable to any court.
No criminal proceeding whatsoever shall be instituted or continued against the President or a Governor in any court during his term of office.
No Civil Proceeding in which relief is claimed against the President or the Governor of a state shall be instituted during his term of office in any Court in respect of any act done or purporting to be done by him in his personal capacity.

Prohibition of discrimination on certain grounds:
Article 15(1) provides that the state shall not discriminate against any citizen on grounds only of religion, race, caste, sex, place of birth or any of them

Article 15 (2) provides that: No citizen shall be on above grounds, subject to any disability, liability, restriction or condition with regard to—
a. access to shops, public restaurants, hotels and places of public entertainment; or
b. the use of wells, tanks, bathing ghats, roads and places of public resort maintained wholly or partly out of State funds or dedicated to the use of the general public.

Exceptions to Article 15:
Article 15 (3), (4) and (5) contains exceptions to the general principal laid down under Article 15 (1) and (2):
Nothing in this article shall prevent the State from making any special provision for women and children.
Nothing in this article shall prevent the State from making any special provision for the advancement of any socially and educationally backward classes of citizens or for the Scheduled Castes.
Nothing in this article shall prevent the State from making any special provision, by law, for the advancement of any socially and educationally backward classes of citizens or for the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled
Tribes in so far as such special provisions relate to their admission to educational institutions including private educational institutions, whether aided or unaided by the State, other than the minority educational institution.

Article 16: Equality of opportunity in matters of public employment. There shall be equality of opportunity for all citizens in matters relating to employment or appointment to any office under the State. No citizen shall, on grounds only of religion, race, caste, sex, descent, place of birth, residence, or any of them; be ineligible for, or discriminated against in respect of, any employment or office under the State.

Exceptions to Article 16:
Nothing in Article 16 shall prevent Parliament from making any law prescribing, in regard to a class or classes of employment or appointment to an office under the Government of, or any local or other authority within, a State or Union territory, any requirement as to residence within that State or Union territory prior to such employment or appointment.
Nothing in Article 16 shall prevent the State from making any provision for the reservation of appointments or posts in favour of any backward class of citizens which, in the opinion of the State, is not adequately represented in the services under the State.
Nothing in Article 16 shall prevent the State from making any provision for reservation in matters of promotion, with consequential seniority, to any class or classes of posts in the services under the State in favour of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes which, in the opinion of the State, are not adequately represented in the services under the State.
Nothing in Article 16 shall affect the operation of any law which provides that the incumbent of an office in connection with the affairs of any religious or denominational institution or any member of the governing body thereof shall be a person professing a particular religion or belonging to a particular denomination.

Abolition of Untouchability:
“Untouchability” is abolished and its practice in any form is forbidden. The enforcement of any disability arising out of “Untouchability” shall be an offence punishable in accordance with law. The term “Untouchability” is not defined under the Constitution. However, it refers to the social disabilities imposed on certain class of person by reason of their birth in certain caste. However, it does not cover social boycott of a few individuals.

Abolition of Titles:
No title, not being a military or academic distinction, shall be conferred by the State.
No citizen of India shall accept any title from any foreign State.
No person who is not a citizen of India shall, while he holds any office of profit or trust under the State, accept without the consent of the President any title from any foreign State.
No person holding any office of profit or trust under the State shall, without the consent of the President, accept any present, emolument, or office of any kind from or under any foreign State.

Right to Freedom:
Article 19(i) defines six freedoms:
a. Freedom of speech and expression
b. Freedom of Assembly
c. Freedom to from Association
d. Freedom of Movement
e. Freedom to reside and to settle
f. Freedom of Profession, occupation, trade or business.
These six freedom are however not absolute, and subject to reasonable restriction which are as follows:-
i. Security of the State ii. Friendly relation with foreign states iii. Public order iv. Decency and Morality v. Contempt of Court vi. Defamation vii. Incitement to an offence viii. Sovereignty and Integrity of India

Judicial pronouncement on Right to speech and expression:
Article 19(1) (a) Meaning of freedom of speech and expression: The freedom of speech and expression, means the right to speak and to express one’s opinions by words of mouth. Writing, printing, pictures or in any other manner. It includes publication also, which includes inherent freedom of press. The liberty of circulation is vested in liberty of publication.
Right to know : the fundamental right principally Principal involved here is the people’s right to know.

Protection in respect of conviction for offences:
Ex-post facto law: No person shall be convicted of any offence except for violation of a law in force at the time of the commission of the Act charged as an offence, nor be subjected to a penalty greater than that which might have been inflicted under the law in force at the time of the commission of the offence.
Double jeopardy: No person shall be prosecuted and punished for the same offence more than once. The protection under this clause is available only in proceedings before a court of law or a judicial tribunal. In other words, it is not available in proceedings before departmental or administrative authorities.
Self -Incrimination: No person accused of any offence shall be compelled to be a witness against himself. It extends to both oral and documentary evidence. It extends to only criminal proceedings and not to civil proceedings. The benefit is available only when all the following conditions are satisfied:
Person must be accused of an offence, there must be compulsion to be witness and such compulsion should result in his giving evidence against himself.

Right to Life and Personal Liberty:
“No person shall be deprived of his life or personal liberty except according to Procedure established by law.” Right to life includes within its ambit the right to live with Human dignity. The S.C. held that the right to life defines not only physical existence but the “quality of life.”

Right to Education-21A:
Article 21A declares that state shall provide free and compulsory education to all children of the age of six to fourteen years in such a manner as the state may decide. Thus, this provision makes only elementary education a fundamental right and not higher or professional education. This provision becomes effective from the date of 01.04.2012.

Protection against arrest and detention:
Article 22 grants protection to persons who are arrested or detained. Detention is of two types Punitive detention and Preventive detention
Punitive detention- is to punish a person for an offence committed by him after trial and conviction in court.
Preventive detention- means detention of a person without a trial and conviction of court. The objective of the preventive detention is not to punish a person for a past offence but to prevent him from committing an offence in near future.

Right against exploitation:
Prohibition of traffic in human beings and forced labour: Article 23 prohibits traffic in human beings and other similar forms of forced labour. This right is available to both citizens and non-citizens. It protects the individual not only against state but also against the private person. However, state may impose compulsory service for public purpose i.e military service or social service.

Prohibition of employment of children in factories etc.: Article 24 prohibits the employment of children below the age of 14 years in any factory, mine or other hazardous activities. But it does not prohibit their employment in any harmless innocent work.

Right to freedom of Religion and freedom of conscience etc.: Article 25 says that all persons are equally entitled to freedom of conscience and the right to freely profess, practice and
propogate religion. The implications of these are freedom of conscience, right to profess, right to propogate, right to practice

Article 25 covers not only religious belief but also religious practices. This right is available to all person citizen as well as noncitizen.

Freedom to manage religious affairs:- As per article 26, every religious denomination or any of its section shall have the following right:
To establish and maintain institutions for religious and charitable purposes;
To manage its own affairs in matters of religion.
To own and acquire movable and immovable property; and
To administer such property in accordance with law.

Denomination:- Religious denomination should satisfy the following condition:
It should be body of individuals who have been system of beliefs which they regards as conductive to their spiritual well being.
It should have common organisation; and
It should be designated by a distinctive name.
For example: - ‘Ramakrishna mission’ and ‘Anand Marg’ and Arvindo Society is not the denomination.

Freedom from taxation for promotion of Religion: Article 27 lays down that no person shall be compelled to pay any taxes for the promotion or maintenance of any particular religion or religious denomination. In other words, the state should not spend the public money collected by way of tax for the promotion or maintenance of any particular religion.
This provision prohibits only levy of tax and not a fees. This is because the purpose of fee is to control secular administration of religious institutions not to promote or maintain religion.

Freedom from attending religious instruction (RI): Article 28 provides that no religious instruction shall be provided in any educational institution wholly maintained out of state funds. However, this provision shall not apply to an educational institution administered by the state but established under any endowment or trust requiring imparting of religious institution in such institution.

Article 28 distinguishes between four types of educational institutions:  
Article 28 distinguishes between four types of educational institutions:-
Institutions wholly maintained by the state- religious instruction (RI) totally prohibited
Institutions administered by the state but established under any endowment or trust-RI permitted
Institutions recognised by the state- RI is permitted on voluntary basis
Institutions receiving aid from the state- RI is permitted on voluntary basis.

Cultural and Educational Rights:
Protection of interest of minority:  Article 29 Any section of the citizens residing in the territory of India or any part thereof having a distinct language, script or culture of its own shall
have the right to conserve the same. Further, No citizen shall be denied admission into any educational institution maintained by the State or receiving aid out of State funds on grounds only of religion, race, caste, language or any of them.

Right of minorities to establish and administer educational institutions: Article 30 All minorities, whether based on religion or language, shall have the right to establish and administer educational institutions of their choice.In making any law providing for the compulsory acquisition of any property of an educational institution established and administered
by a minority, the State shall ensure that the amount fixed by or determined under such law for the acquisition of such property is such as would not restrict or abrogate the right guaranteed. The State shall not, in granting aid to educational institutions, discriminate against any educational institution on the ground that it is under the management of a minority, whether based on religion or language.

Minority educational institutions are of three types:-
1. Institutions that seek recognition as well as aid from the state.
2. Institutions that seek only recognition from the state not aid.
3. Institutions that neither seek recognition nor aid from the state.
Only first two types of institutions are subject to state control.

Right to constitutional Remedies: Article 32 A mere declaration of fundamental rights in the constitution is meaningless, useless and worthless without providing effective machinery for their enforcement. In other words right of enforcement is itself a fundamental right. That is why Dr. Ambedkar called Article 32 as the heart and soul of the constitution.

Article 32 empowers the Supreme Court to act as defender and guarantor of the fundamental rights of the citizen. It has been vested with ‘original and ‘wide’ powers for that purpose. The purpose of Art. 32 is to provide a guaranteed, effective, expeditious, inexpensive and summary remedy for the protection of the fundamental rights. Only the fundamental right can be enforced and not any other right like statutory right, customary rights etc. The violation of fundamental right is sine qua non for the applicability of article 32. However, the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court in case of violation fundamental right is concurrent with the jurisdiction of the High Court as per Article 226 of the constitution. It means when the fundamental right of a citizen is violated, the aggrieved party has the option of moving either the High Court or Supreme Court directly. Supreme Court and High Court ( in case of any other right also) provides the remedy in form of writ.

Writs in the Constitution: Following are different writs in the constitution
Habeas Corpus: It is Latin term which literally means ‘to have the body of’. It is an order issued by the court to a person who has detained another person to produce the body of latter before it. The court then examines the cause and legality of the detention. It would set the detained person free, if the detention is found to be illegal. Thus writ is a bulwark of individual liberty against arbitrary detention. The writ of Habeas Corpus can issued against both public and private person. However it cannot be issued in following cases:-
1. Detention is lawful.
2. Proceeding is for contempt of legislation or a court.
3. Detention is by a competent court.
4. Detention is outside the jurisdiction of the court.

Mandamus: It literally means ‘we command’. It is command issued by the court to a public official asking him to perform his official duties that he has failed or refused to perform. It can also be issued against any public body, a corporation, an inferior court, a tribunal or government for the same purpose. It cannot be issued in the following cases:
1. Against a private individual or body
2. To enforce departmental instruction
3. When the duty is discretionary not mandatory
4. Against the president or Governor.

Prohibition:- Literally means ‘to forbid’. It is issued by higher court to a lower court or tribunal to prevent the latter from exceeding the jurisdiction. Thus unlike, mandamus that directs activity, the prohibition directs inactivity. It is not issued against Administrative authorities, Legislative authorities and Private individuals.

Certiorari:- In the literal sense, it means ‘to be certified’ or ‘to be informed’. It is issued by higher court to a lower court or tribunal either to transfer a case pending with the latter to itself or squash the order of the latter in a case. It is issued on the grounds of Excess of jurisdiction, Lack of jurisdiction and Error of law. Thus, unlike prohibition, which is only preventive, certiorari is both preventive as well as curative. Certiorari can be issued against even the administrative authorities affecting the rights of individual as per the ruling of the supreme since 1991.

Quo-Warranto:- In the literal sense, ‘it means by what authority or warrant’. It is issued by the court to enquire in to the legality of claim of a person to a public office.

Directive Principles of State Policy (DPSP) in the Constitution:
The Directive Principles of State Policy (DPSP) contained in Part IV of the Constitution set out aims and objective to be taken up by the States in the governance of the country. This
feature of the Constitution is borrowed from the Constitution of Ireland. The idea of a welfare State established by our constitution can only be achieved if the States try to implement them with a high sense of moral duty. The main object in enacting the directive principles appears is to set standard of achievement before the legislature and the executive, the local and other authorities, by which their success or failure can be judge. 

The Constitution of India contains the following directive principals:
i. Directive for social order based on justice – Art 38(1) requires the State to try and promote the welfare of the people by securing a social order in which every one is assured social, economic and political justice.
ii. Directives in the nature of non-justifiable right of every citizen –
a. Article 39(a): Right to adequate means of livelihood.
b. Article 39(b): Right of both sexes to equal pay for equal work.
c. Article 39(e):Right against economic exploitation.
d. Article 39(A): Equitable justice and free legal aid.
iii. Article 40: To organize village Panchayats as units of self-government.
iv. Article 41: Right of work within the economic capacity of the state.
v. Article 42: The State shall make provision for securing just and humane conditions of work and for maternity relief. 
vi. Article 43: To develop cottage industries.
vii. Article 43(A): Participation of workers in management of industries.
viii. Article 44: To secure a uniform civil code for the Citizen.
ix. Article 45: The State shall endeavour to provide, free and compulsory education for all children until they complete the age of fourteen years.
x. Article 46: To promote with special care the educational and economic interests of the weaker section of the People and, in particular, of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes, and shall protect them from social injustice and all forms of exploitation.
xi. Article 47: To prohibit consumption of liquors and intoxicating drug except for medical purposes.
xii. To organize agriculture and animal husbandry on modern lines.
xiii. Article 48(A): Protection and improvement of environment and safeguarding of forests and wild life.
xiv. Article 49: To protect and maintain places of historic, and artistic interest.
xv. Article 50: To separate judiciary from executive.
xvi. The State shall endeavour to a.promote international peace and security; b. maintain just and honourable relations between nations.

Relation between fundamental rights and Directive Principles of State Policy (DPSP):
Directive Principles of State Policy (DPSP) contained in Part IV of the Constitution. These are defined in Art 36 to 51 set out the aims and objectives to be taken up by the State in the Governance of the country. The Directive Principles of State Policy (DPSP) is borrowed from the Constitution of Ireland. The Directive Principles of State Policy (DPSP) are not justifiable.
Fundamental Rights are contained in Part III of the Constitution. These are defined in Art 12 to 35. These rights are provided for to every person of India and it can be enforced by the Court.

In Kesvanand Bharti v. State of Kerala, The Supreme Court held that the fundamental right & D.P.S.P. aim is the some goal of bringing about a social revolution and establishment of a welfare state and they can be interpreted and applied together.

Fundamental duties in the Constitution:
a. To abide by the Constitution and respect its ideals and institutions, the National Flag and the national Anthem
b. To Cherish and follow the noble ideals which inspired our National Struggle for freedom.
c. To uphold and protect the Sovereignty – Unity and integrity of India.
d. To defend the Country and render National Service when called upon to do so.
e. To Promote harmony and the spirit of common brotherhood amongst all the people of India, Transcending, religious, linguistic and regional or Sectional diversities, to renounce
Practices derogatory to the dignity of woman.
f. To value and presence the rich heritage of our composite culture.
g. To protect and improve the Natural, environment, Including forests, lakes, rivers and wild life, to have compassion for living creatures.
h. To develop the Scientific temper, humanism and the spirit of inquiry and reform.
i. To safeguard public property and to abjure violence.
j. To strive towards excellence in all sphere of individual and collective activity. So that the nation constantly rises to higher levels of Endeavour and achievement.
k. Who is Parent or Guardian to Provide opportunities for education to his child or as the case be ward between the age of six and fourteen years.

Ordinance Making Power: 
Article 123: If any time when both house of Parliament are not in session, President may issue ordinance having same force of as an Act of Parliament. Such ordinance must be laid before both houses of Parliament and shall have effect up to six weeks of unless Parliament by disapproved by resolution. An ordinance Promulgated under Article 123 is a law having same force and effect as an Act at Parliament. The ordinance passed by the President cannot be inquired into challenged in Courts. It can not violate fundamental rights.

Article 1: Name and territory of the Union
(1) India, that is Bharat, shall be a Union of States.
(2) The States and the territories thereof shall be as specified in the First Schedule.

Article 2: Admission or establishment of new States
(1) Parliament may by law admit into the Union, or establish, new States on such terms and conditions as it thinks fit.
(2) Such law may contain provisions for the amendment of the First Schedule and the Fourth Schedule, and consequential and incidental matters.

Article 3: Formation of new States and alteration of areas, boundaries or names of existing States
(1) Parliament may by law form a new State by separation of territory from any State or by uniting two or more States or parts of States or by uniting any territory to a part of any State.
(2) Parliament may by law alter the areas, boundaries or names of any existing State.
(3) A Bill for the purpose shall be introduced in either House of Parliament only on the recommendation of the President and unless, where the proposal contained in the Bill affects the area, boundaries or name of any of the States, the Bill has been referred by the President to the Legislature of that State for expressing its views thereon within such period as may be specified in the reference or within such further period as the President may allow and the period so specified or allowed has expired.

Article 4: Laws made under Articles 2 and 3 to provide for the amendment of the First and Fourth Schedules and supplemental, incidental, consequential and transitional matters
(1) Any law referred to in Article 2 or Article 3 shall contain such provisions for the amendment of the First Schedule and the Fourth Schedule as may be necessary to give effect to the provisions of the law and may also contain such supplemental, incidental and consequential provisions (including provisions as to representation in Parliament and in the Legislature or Legislatures of the State or States affected by such law) as Parliament may deem necessary.
(2) No such law as aforesaid shall be deemed to be an amendment of this Constitution for the purposes of Article 368.

Article 5: Citizenship at the commencement of the Constitution
At the commencement of this Constitution, every person who has his domicile in the territory of India and
(a) who was born in the territory of India; or
(b) either of whose parents was born in the territory of India; or
(c) who has been ordinarily resident in the territory of India for not less than five years preceding such commencement,
shall be a citizen of India.

Article 6: Rights of citizenship of certain persons who have migrated to India from Pakistan
(1) Notwithstanding anything in article 5, a person who has migrated to the territory of India from the territory now included in Pakistan shall be deemed to be a citizen of India at the commencement of this Constitution if
(a) he or either of his parents or any of his grandparents was born in India as defined in the Government of India Act, 1935 (as originally enacted); and
(b) (i) in the case where such person has so migrated before the nineteenth day of July, 1948, he has been ordinarily resident in the territory of India since the date of his migration, or
(ii) in the case where such person has so migrated on or after the nineteenth day of July, 1948, he has been registered as a citizen of India by an officer appointed in that behalf by the Government of the Dominion of India on an application made by him therefor to such officer before the commencement of this Constitution in the form and manner prescribed by that Government:

Article 7: Rights of citizenship of certain migrants to Pakistan
(1) Notwithstanding anything in articles 5 and 6, a person who has after the first day of March, 1947, migrated from the territory of India to the territory now included in Pakistan shall not be deemed to be a citizen of India:
Provided that nothing in this article shall apply to a person who, after having so migrated to the territory now included in Pakistan, has returned to the territory of India under a permit for resettlement or permanent return issued by or under the authority of any law and every such person shall for the purposes of clause (b) of article 6 be deemed to have migrated to the territory of India after the nineteenth day of July, 1948.

Article 8: Abolition of Untouchability
(1) Untouchability is abolished and its practice in any form is forbidden.
(2) The enforcement of any disability arising out of Untouchability shall be an offence punishable in accordance with law.
(3) Nothing in this article shall prevent the State from making any provision for the protection, welfare, or advancement of Scheduled Castes or Scheduled Tribes.

Article 9: Protection of rights of certain classes of persons
(1) The State shall not deny to any person equality before the law or the equal protection of the laws within the territory of India.
(2) The State shall not discriminate against any citizen on grounds only of religion, race, caste, sex, place of birth or any of them.
(3) Nothing in this article shall prevent the State from making any special provision for women and children.
(4) Nothing in this article or in clause (2) of Article 29 shall prevent the State from making any special provision for the advancement of any socially and educationally backward classes of citizens or for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes.

Article 10: Continuance of the rights of citizenship
Every person who is or is deemed to be a citizen of India under any of the foregoing provisions of this Part shall, subject to the provisions of any law that may be made by Parliament, continue to be such citizen.

Article 11: Parliament to regulate the right of citizenship by law
(1) Nothing in the foregoing provisions of this Part shall derogate from the power of Parliament to make any provision with respect to the acquisition and termination of citizenship and all other matters relating to citizenship.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, Parliament may by law provide-
(a) for the acquisition of citizenship by persons who have migrated to India from any country outside India;
(b) for the registration of overseas citizens of India;
(c) for the renunciation of citizenship by any person;
(d) for determining the nationality of persons for the purposes of this Constitution;

Article 12: Definition of the State
In this Part, unless the context otherwise requires, the State includes the Government and Parliament of India and the Government and the Legislature of each of the States and all local or other authorities within the territory of India or under the control of the Government of India.

Article 13: Laws inconsistent with or in derogation of the fundamental rights
(1) All laws in force in the territory of India immediately before the commencement of this Constitution, in so far as they are inconsistent with the provisions of this Part, shall, to the extent of such inconsistency, be void.
(2) The State shall not make any law which takes away or abridges the rights conferred by this Part and any law made in contravention of this clause shall, to the extent of the contravention, be void.
(3) In this article, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(a) "laws in force" includes laws passed or made by a Legislature or other competent authority in the territory of India before the commencement of this Constitution and not previously repealed, notwithstanding that any such law or any part thereof may not be then in operation either at all or in particular areas;
(b) "laws in force" includes also the orders, bye-laws, rules and regulations made thereunder before the commencement of this Constitution and not previously repealed;

Article 14: Equality before law
The State shall not deny to any person equality before the law or the equal protection of the laws within the territory of India.

Article 15: Prohibition of discrimination on grounds of religion, race, caste, sex or place of birth
(1) The State shall not discriminate against any citizen on grounds only of religion, race, caste, sex, place of birth or any of them.
(2) No citizen shall, on grounds only of religion, race, caste, sex, place of birth or any of them, be subject to any disability, liability, restriction or condition with regard to-
(a) access to shops, public restaurants, hotels and places of public entertainment; or
(b) the use of wells, tanks, bathing ghats, roads and places of public resort maintained wholly or partly out of State funds or dedicated to the use of the general public.
Article 16: Equality of opportunity in matters of public employment
(1) There shall be equality of opportunity for all citizens in matters relating to employment or appointment to any office under the State.
(2) No citizen shall, on grounds only of religion, race, caste, sex, descent, place of birth, residence or any of them, be ineligible for, or discriminated against in respect of, any employment or office under the State.
(3) Nothing in this article shall prevent Parliament from making any law prescribing, in regard to a class or classes of employment or appointment to an office under the Government of, or any local or other authority within, a State or Union territory, any requirement as to residence within that State or Union territory prior to such employment or appointment.

Article 16: Equality of opportunity in matters of public employment
(1) There shall be equality of opportunity for all citizens in matters relating to employment or appointment to any office under the State.
(2) No citizen shall, on grounds only of religion, race, caste, sex, descent, place of birth, residence or any of them, be ineligible for, or discriminated against in respect of, any employment or office under the State.
(3) Nothing in this article shall prevent Parliament from making any law prescribing, in regard to a class or classes of employment or appointment to an office under the Government of, or any local or other authority within, a State or Union territory, any requirement as to residence within that State or Union territory prior to such employment or appointment.
(4) Nothing in this article shall prevent the State from making any provision for the reservation of appointments or posts in favor of any backward class of citizens which, in the opinion of the State, is not adequately represented in the services under the State.
(5) Nothing in this article shall affect the operation of any law which provides that the incumbent of an office in connection with the affairs of any religious or denominational institution or any member of the governing body thereof shall be a person professing a particular religion or belonging to a particular denomination.

Article 17: Abolition of Untouchability
(1) “Untouchability” is abolished and its practice in any form is forbidden. The enforcement of any disability arising out of “Untouchability” shall be an offence punishable in accordance with law.
(2) Nothing in this article shall prevent the State from making any special provision for the advancement of any socially and educationally backward classes of citizens or for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes.

Article 18: Abolition of Titles
(1) No title, not being a military or academic distinction, shall be conferred by the State.
(2) No citizen of India shall accept any title from any foreign State.
(3) No person who is not a citizen of India shall, while he holds any office of profit or trust under the State, accept without the consent of the President any title from any foreign State.
(4) No person holding any office of profit or trust under the State shall, without the consent of the President, accept any present, emolument, or office of any kind from or under any foreign State.
(5) The President may, by rule, specify the titles which may be conferred by the State, the qualifications necessary for conferment of such titles, and the manner of their conferment.

Article 19: Protection of certain rights regarding freedom of speech, etc.
(1) All citizens shall have the right—
(a) to freedom of speech and expression;
(b) to assemble peaceably and without arms;
(c) to form associations or unions;
(d) to move freely throughout the territory of India;
(e) to reside and settle in any part of the territory of India; and
(f) to practice any profession, or to carry on any occupation, trade or business.
(2) Nothing in subclause (a) of clause (1) shall affect the operation of any existing law, or prevent the State from making any law, in so far as such law imposes reasonable restrictions on the exercise of the right conferred by the said subclause in the interests of the sovereignty and integrity of India, the security of the State, friendly relations with foreign States, public order, decency or morality, or in relation to contempt of court, defamation or incitement to an offence.

Article 20: Protection in respect of conviction for offences
(1) No person shall be convicted of any offence except for violation of a law in force at the time of the commission of the act charged as an offence, nor be subjected to a penalty greater than that which might have been inflicted under the law in force at the time of the commission of the offence.
(2) No person shall be prosecuted and punished for the same offence more than once.
(3) No person accused of any offence shall be compelled to be a witness against himself.
(4) No person shall be subjected to any harsher punishment than what was applicable at the time of the commission of the offence.

Article 21: Protection of Life and Personal Liberty
(1) No person shall be deprived of his life or personal liberty except according to the procedure established by law.
(2) No person shall be denied the right to education.
(3) The State shall not discriminate against any citizen on grounds only of religion, race, caste, sex, place of birth or any of them.
(4) The State shall provide free and compulsory education to all children of the age of six to fourteen years in such manner as the State may, by law, determine.

Article 22: Protection against arrest and detention in certain cases
(1) No person who is arrested shall be detained in custody without being informed, as soon as may be, of the grounds for such arrest nor shall he be denied the right to consult, and to be defended by, a legal practitioner of his choice.
(2) Every person who is arrested and detained in custody shall be produced before the nearest magistrate within a period of twenty-four hours of such arrest excluding the time necessary for the journey from the place of arrest to the court of the magistrate and no such person shall be detained in custody beyond the said period without the authority of a magistrate.
(3) Nothing in clauses (1) and (2) shall apply—
(a) to any person who for the time being is an enemy alien; or
(b) to any person who is arrested or detained under any law providing for preventive detention.
(4) No law providing for preventive detention shall authorize the detention of a person for a longer period than three months unless—
(a) an Advisory Board consisting of persons who are, or have been, or are qualified to be appointed as, Judges of a High Court has reported before the expiration of the said period of three months that there is in its opinion sufficient cause for such detention:
Provided that nothing in this sub-clause shall authorise the detention of any person beyond the maximum period prescribed by any law made by Parliament under sub-clause (b) of clause (7); or
(b) such person is detained in accordance with the provisions of any law made by Parliament under sub-clauses (a) and (b) of clause (7).

Article 23: Prohibition of traffic in human beings and forced labor
(1) Traffic in human beings and begar and other similar forms of forced labor are prohibited, and any contravention of this provision shall be an offense punishable in accordance with the law.
(2) Nothing in this article shall prevent the State from imposing compulsory service for public purposes, and in imposing such service, the State shall not make any discrimination on grounds only of religion, race, caste, or class or any of them.

Article 24: Prohibition of employment of children in factories, etc.
(1) No child below the age of fourteen years shall be employed to work in any factory or mine or engaged in any other hazardous employment.
(2) Nothing in clause (1) shall apply to any of the following classes of work or employment, namely:
(a) work performed by a child in a family or family enterprise or in any other non-hazardous work, if such work or enterprise does not involve the employing of other persons;
(b) work performed by a child in a school established, run or supported by any Government or voluntary agency where such work or employment does not interfere with the child’s education.

Article 25: Freedom of conscience and free profession, practice, and propagation of religion
(1) Subject to public order, morality, and health and to the other provisions of this Part, all persons are equally entitled to freedom of conscience and the right freely to profess, practice, and propagate religion.
(2) Nothing in this article shall affect the operation of any existing law or prevent the State from making any law—
(a) regulating or restricting any economic, financial, political or other secular activity which may be associated with religious practice;
(b) providing for social welfare and reform or the throwing open of Hindu religious institutions of a public character to all classes and sections of Hindus.

Article 26: Freedom to manage religious affairs
(1) Subject to public order, morality and health, every religious denomination or any section thereof shall have the right—
(a) to establish and maintain institutions for religious and charitable purposes;
(b) to manage its own affairs in matters of religion;
(c) to own and acquire movable and immovable property; and
(d) to administer such property in accordance with law.
(2) Nothing in this article shall affect the operation of any existing law or prevent the State from making any law—
(a) regulating or restricting any economic, financial, political or other secular activity which may be associated with religious practice;
(b) providing for social welfare and reform or the throwing open of Hindu religious institutions of a public character to all classes and sections of Hindus.

Article 27: Freedom as to payment of taxes
(1) No person shall be compelled to pay any taxes, the proceeds of which are specifically appropriated in payment of expenses for the promotion or maintenance of any particular religion or religious denomination.
(2) No person attending any educational institution recognised by the State or receiving aid out of State funds shall be required to take part in any religious instruction that may be imparted in such institution or to attend any religious worship that may be conducted in such institution or in any premises attached thereto unless such person or, if such person is a minor, his guardian has given his consent thereto.

Article 28: Freedom as to attendance at religious instruction or religious worship in certain educational institutions
(1) No religious instruction shall be provided in any educational institution wholly maintained out of State funds.
(2) Nothing in clause (1) shall apply to an educational institution which is administered by the State but has been established under any endowment or trust which requires that religious instruction shall be imparted in such institution.
(3) No person attending any educational institution recognised by the State or receiving aid out of State funds shall be required to take part in any religious instruction that may be imparted in such institution or to attend any religious worship that may be conducted in such institution or in any premises attached thereto unless such person or, if such person is a minor, his guardian has given his consent thereto.

Article 29: Protection of Interests of Minorities
(1) Any section of the citizens residing in the territory of India or any part thereof having a distinct language, script or culture of its own shall have the right to conserve the same.
(2) No citizen shall be denied admission into any educational institution maintained by the State or receiving aid out of State funds on grounds only of religion, race, caste, language or any of them.
(3) All minorities, whether based on religion or language, shall have the right to establish and administer educational institutions of their choice.
(4) The State shall not, in granting aid to educational institutions, discriminate against any educational institution on the ground that it is under the management of a minority, whether based on religion or language.

Article 30: Right of minorities to establish and administer educational institutions.
(1) All minorities, whether based on religion or language, shall have the right to establish and administer educational institutions of their choice.
(1A) In making any law providing for the compulsory acquisition of any property of an educational institution established and administered by a minority, referred to in clause (1), the State shall ensure that the amount fixed by or determined under such law for the acquisition of such property is such as would not restrict or abrogate the right guaranteed under that clause.
(2) The State shall not, in granting aid to educational institutions, discriminate against any educational institution on the ground that it is under the management of a minority, whether based on religion or language.

Article 31: Right to Property
(1) No person shall be deprived of his property save by authority of law.
(2) No property, movable or immovable, including any interest in, or in any company owning, any commercial or industrial undertaking, shall be taken possession of or acquired for public purposes under any law authorising the taking of such possession or such acquisition, unless the law provides for compensation for the property taken possession of or acquired and either fixes the amount of the compensation or specifies the principles on which, and the manner in which, the compensation is to be determined and given.
(3) No such law as is referred to in clause (2) made by the State Legislature shall have effect unless such law, having been reserved for the consideration of the President, has received his assent; but nothing in this clause shall apply to a law which does not contain any provision for the acquisition of any estate or of any rights therein or for the extinguishment or modification of any such rights. Explanation I.—In this clause,
(a) the expression "State Legislature", in relation to a State having a Legislature of the type referred to in article 193, includes the Governor acting within the scope of his powers and functions under article 213;
(b) the expression "law" includes a Central Act and a Provincial Act or an existing law of a State;
(c) the expression "existing law" has the same meaning as in article 372;
(d) the expression "public purpose" includes—
(i) the provision of village-sites or the extension, planned development or improvement of existing village-sites;
(ii) the provision of land for town or rural planning;
(iii) the provision of land for planned development of the State or any area thereof;
(iv) the provision of land for use by an educational, charitable or other public institution;
(v) the provision of land for a corporation owned or controlled by the State;
(vi) the provision of land for housing or setting up industries, the working of which is likely to prove injurious to the health, safety or morals of the inhabitants of the locality;
(vii) the provision of land for carrying out any other scheme of development or improvement which the appropriate authority considers necessary for the proper planning of the area or for the benefit of the general public;
Explanation II.—In sub-clause (f), the expression "the appropriate authority" means such authority as may be prescribed by or under any law made by a State Legislature or, until provision in that behalf is so made, such authority as may be prescribed by or under any existing law made by Parliament, and includes any Government company as defined in section 617 of the Companies Act, 1956. Explanation III.—In this clause—
(a) the expression "estate" shall, in relation to any local area, have the same meaning as that expression or its local equivalent has in the existing law relating to land tenures in force in that area and shall also include any jagir, inam or muafi or other similar grant and in the States of Tamil Nadu and Kerala, any janmam right;
(b) the expression "rights", in relation to an estate, shall include any rights vesting in a proprietor, sub-proprietor, under-proprietor, tenure-holder, raiyat, under-raiyat or other intermediary and any rights or privileges in respect of land revenue.

Article 32: Remedies for enforcement of rights conferred by this Part
(1) The right to move the Supreme Court by appropriate proceedings for the enforcement of the rights conferred by this Part is guaranteed.
(2) The Supreme Court shall have power to issue directions or orders or writs, including writs in the nature of habeas corpus, mandamus, prohibition, quo warranto and certiorari, whichever may be appropriate, for the enforcement of any of the rights conferred by this Part.
(3) Without prejudice to the powers conferred on the Supreme Court by clauses (1) and (2), Parliament may by law empower any other court to exercise within the local limits of its jurisdiction all or any of the powers exercisable by the Supreme Court under clause (2).
(4) The right guaranteed by this article shall not be suspended except as otherwise provided for by this Constitution.

Article 33: Power of Parliament to modify the rights conferred by this Part in their application to Forces, etc.
Parliament may, by law, determine to what extent any of the rights conferred by this Part shall, in their application to, -
(a) the members of the Armed Forces; or
(b) the members of the Forces charged with the maintenance of public order; or
(c) persons employed in any bureau or other organisation established by the State for purposes of intelligence or counter intelligence; or
(d) persons employed in, or in connection with, the telecommunication systems set up for the purposes of any Force, bureau or organisation referred to in clauses (a) to (c), be restricted or abrogated so as to ensure the proper discharge of their duties and the maintenance of discipline among them.

Article 34: Restriction on rights conferred by this Part while martial law is in force in any area
Notwithstanding anything in the foregoing provisions of this Part, Parliament may by law indemnify any person in the service of the Union or of a State or any other person in respect of any act done by him in connection with the maintenance or restoration of order in any area within the territory of India where martial law was in force or validate any sentence passed, punishment inflicted, forfeiture ordered, or other act done under martial law in such area.

Article 35: Protection of rights conferred by this Part
The Parliament may not make any law that takes away or abridges the rights conferred by this Part (Fundamental Rights) and any law made in contravention of this provision shall be void.

Article 36: Definition
In this Part, unless the context otherwise requires, 'the State' has the same meaning as in Part III.

Article 37: Application of the principles contained in this Part.
The provisions contained in this Part shall not be enforceable by any court, but the principles therein laid down are nevertheless fundamental in the governance of the country and it shall be the duty of the State to apply these principles in making laws.

Article 38: State to secure a social order for the promotion of welfare of people
(1) The State shall strive to promote the welfare of the people by securing and protecting as effectively as it may a social order in which justice, social, economic and political, shall inform all the institutions of the national life.
(2) The State shall, in particular, strive to minimize the inequalities in income, and endeavor to eliminate inequalities in status, facilities, and opportunities, not only amongst individuals but also amongst groups of people residing in different areas or engaged in different vocations.
(3) The State shall make laws to secure such social, economic, and political justice to all its citizens, and shall take suitable measures to promote the welfare of the people by ensuring that the material resources of the community are so distributed as best to subserve the common good.

Article 39: Certain principles of policy to be followed by the State
The State shall, in particular, direct its policy towards securing—
(a) that the citizens, men and women equally, have the right to an adequate means of livelihood;
(b) that the ownership and control of the material resources of the community are so distributed as best to subserve the common good;
(c) that the operation of the economic system does not result in the concentration of wealth and means of production to the common detriment;
(d) that there is equal pay for equal work for both men and women;
(e) that the health and strength of workers, men and women, and the tender age of children are not abused and that citizens are not forced by economic necessity to enter avocations unsuited to their age or strength;
(f) that children are given opportunities and facilities to develop in a healthy manner and in conditions of freedom and dignity and that childhood and youth are protected against exploitation and against moral and material abandonment.

Article 40: Organisation of Village Panchayats
(1) The State shall take steps to organise village panchayats and endow them with such powers and authority as may be necessary to enable them to function as units of self-government.
(2) The State shall provide for the representation of the members of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes in the village panchayats at all levels in proportion to their population in the village.
(3) Not less than one-third of the total number of seats reserved under clause (2) shall be reserved for women belonging to the Scheduled Castes or, as the case may be, the Scheduled Tribes.
(4) Election to the offices of the village panchayats shall be by direct election on the basis of adult suffrage.
(5) The Legislature of a State may, by law, endow the village panchayats with such powers and authority as may be necessary to enable them to function as institutions of self-government and such law may contain provisions for the devolution of powers and responsibilities upon panchayats at the appropriate level, subject to such conditions as may be specified therein, with respect to—
(a) the preparation of plans for economic development and social justice;
(b) the implementation of schemes for economic development and social justice as may be entrusted to them including those in relation to the matters listed in the Eleventh Schedule.

Article 41: Right to work, to education and to public assistance in certain cases
(1) The State shall, within the limits of its economic capacity and development, make effective provision for securing the right to work, to education and to public assistance in cases of unemployment, old age, sickness and disablement, and in other cases of undeserved want.
(2) The State shall make provision for securing just and humane conditions of work and for maternity relief.
(3) The State shall endeavour to secure, by suitable legislation or economic organization or in any other way, to all workers, agricultural, industrial or otherwise, work, a living wage, conditions of work ensuring a decent standard of life and full enjoyment of leisure and social and cultural opportunities and, in particular, the State shall endeavour to promote cottage industries on an individual or cooperative basis in rural areas.

Article 42: Provision for just and humane conditions of work and maternity relief
The State shall make provision for securing just and humane conditions of work and for maternity relief.

Article 43: Living Wage and Conditions of Work
(1) The State shall endeavour to secure, by suitable legislation or economic organisation or in any other way, to all workers, agricultural, industrial or otherwise, work, a living wage, conditions of work ensuring a decent standard of life and full enjoyment of leisure and social and cultural opportunities and, in particular, the State shall endeavour to promote cottage industries on an individual or co-operative basis in rural areas.
(2) The State shall, in particular, direct its policy towards securing—
(a) that the citizens, men and women equally, have the right to an adequate means to livelihood;
(b) that the ownership and control of the material resources of the community are so distributed as best to subserve the common good;
(c) that the operation of the economic system does not result in the concentration of wealth and means of production to the common detriment;
(d) that there is equal pay for equal work for both men and women;
(e) that the health and strength of workers, men and women, and the tender age of children are not abused and that citizens are not forced by economic necessity to enter avocations unsuited to their age or strength;
(f) that children are given opportunities and facilities to develop in a healthy manner and in conditions of freedom and dignity and that childhood and youth are protected against exploitation and against moral and material abandonment.

Article 44: Uniform Civil Code
The State shall endeavour to secure for the citizens a uniform civil code throughout the territory of India.
Explanation:
The concept of a uniform civil code envisions a common set of laws governing personal matters such as marriage, divorce, inheritance, and adoption for all citizens of India, regardless of their religion. The objective is to promote social cohesion, gender equality, and justice by eliminating discriminatory practices based on religious beliefs or customs.

Article 45: Provision for free and compulsory education for children
(1) The State shall endeavour to provide, within a period of ten years from the commencement of this Constitution, for free and compulsory education for all children until they complete the age of fourteen years.
(2) Nothing in this article shall prevent the State from making any provision for the advancement of any socially and educationally backward classes of citizens or for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes.
(3) The State shall make special provision for women and children.

Article 46: Promotion of Educational and Economic Interests of Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes, and Other Weaker Sections
The State shall promote with special care the educational and economic interests of the weaker sections of the people, and, in particular, of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes, and shall protect them from social injustice and all forms of exploitation.

Article 47: Duty of the State to raise the level of nutrition and the standard of living and to improve public health.
The State shall regard the raising of the level of nutrition and the standard of living of its people and the improvement of public health as among its primary duties and, in particular, the State shall endeavor to bring about prohibition of the consumption except for medicinal purposes of intoxicating drinks and of drugs which are injurious to health.

Article 48: Organization of agriculture and animal husbandry
The State shall endeavour to organize agriculture and animal husbandry on modern and scientific lines and shall take steps for preserving and improving the breeds, and prohibiting the slaughter, of cows and calves and other milch and draught cattle.

Article 49: Protection of monuments and places and objects of national importance
It shall be the obligation of the State to protect every monument or place or object of artistic or historic interest, declared by or under law made by Parliament to be of national importance, from spoliation, disfigurement, destruction, removal, disposal or export, as the case may be.

Article 50: Separation of Judiciary from Executive
The State shall take steps to separate the judiciary from the executive in the public services of the State.

Article 51: Promotion of international peace and security
The State shall endeavour to:
(a) promote international peace and security;
(b) maintain just and honourable relations between nations;
(c) foster respect for international law and treaty obligations in the dealings of organized peoples with one another; and
(d) encourage settlement of international disputes by arbitration.

Article 52: The President of India
(1) There shall be a President of India who shall be the Head of State and exercise powers, duties, and functions as provided under the Constitution.
(2) The President shall be elected by an Electoral College consisting of the elected members of both Houses of Parliament and the Legislative Assemblies of the States.
(3) The President shall hold office for a term of five years and is eligible for re-election.

Article 53: Executive power of the Union
(1) The executive power of the Union shall be vested in the President and shall be exercised by him either directly or through officers subordinate to him in accordance with this Constitution.
(2) Nothing in this article shall—
(a) be deemed to transfer to the President any functions conferred by any existing law on the Government of any State or other authority; or
(b) prevent Parliament from conferring by law functions on authorities other than the President.

Article 54: Election of President
(1) The President of India shall be elected by an Electoral College consisting of the elected members of both Houses of Parliament and the Legislative Assemblies of the States.
(2) Every election of the President shall be held in accordance with the system of proportional representation by means of the single transferable vote.

Article 55: Election of President
(1) The President shall be elected by the members of an Electoral College consisting of—
(a) the elected members of both Houses of Parliament; and
(b) the elected members of the Legislative Assemblies of the States.
(2) No person shall be eligible for election as President unless he—
(a) is a citizen of India,
(b) has completed the age of thirty-five years, and
(c) is qualified for election as a member of the House of the People.

Article 56: Term of Office of President
(1) The President shall hold office for a term of five years from the date on which he enters upon his office.
(2) The President may, by writing under his hand addressed to the Vice-President, resign his office.
(3) The President may, for violation of the Constitution, be removed from office by impeachment in the manner provided in Article 61.
(4) The President shall, notwithstanding the expiration of his term, continue to hold office until his successor enters upon his office.

Article 57: Eligibility for re-election of President
(1) A person who holds, or who has held, office as President shall be eligible for re-election to that office.
(2) The manner of election of President shall be regulated by law made by Parliament.

Article 58: Qualifications for Election as President
(1) No person shall be eligible for election as President unless he—
(a) is a citizen of India,
(b) has completed the age of thirty-five years, and
(c) is qualified for election as a member of the House of the People.
(2) A person shall not be eligible for election as President if he holds any office of profit under the Government of India or the Government of any State or under any local or other authority subject to the control of any of the said Governments.

Article 59: Election of Vice-President
(1) The Vice-President shall be elected by the members of an Electoral College consisting of the members of both Houses of Parliament in accordance with the system of proportional representation by means of the single transferable vote.
(2) Any dispute concerning the election of the Vice-President shall be inquired into and decided by the Supreme Court whose decision shall be final.

Article 60: Oath or Affirmation by the President
Before entering upon his office, the President shall make and subscribe in the presence of the Chief Justice of India, or in his absence, the senior-most Judge of the Supreme Court available, an oath or affirmation in the following form, that is to say:
“I, A.B., do swear in the name of God (or solemnly affirm) that I will faithfully execute the office of President (or discharge the functions of the President) of India and will to the best of my ability preserve, protect and defend the Constitution and the law and that I will devote myself to the service and well-being of the people of India.”

Article 61: Procedure for impeachment of the President
(1) When a President is to be impeached for violation of the Constitution, the charge shall be preferred by either House of Parliament.
(2) No such charge shall be preferred unless—
(a) the proposal to prefer such charge is contained in a resolution which has been moved after at least fourteen days' notice in writing signed by not less than one-fourth of the total number of members of the House has been given of their intention to move the resolution, and
(b) such resolution has been passed by a majority of not less than two-thirds of the total membership of the House.
(3) When a charge has been so preferred by either House of Parliament, the other House shall investigate the charge or cause the charge to be investigated and the President shall have the right to appear and to be represented at such investigation.

Article 62: Appointment of Ministers
(1) The President shall, on the advice of the Prime Minister, appoint the following ministers:
(a) the Attorney-General for India;
(b) the Minister of State for Law and Justice;
(c) the Ministers for the time being holding office under the provisions of this Constitution;
(d) the Ministers of State for the time being holding office under the Government of a State.
(2) The total number of Ministers, including the Prime Minister, in the Council of Ministers shall not exceed fifteen percent of the total number of members of the House of the People.
(3) A member of either House of Parliament belonging to any political party who is disqualified for being a member of that House under paragraph (a) of clause (1) of article 102 shall also be disqualified to be appointed as a Minister under clause (1) for duration of the period commencing from the date of his disqualification till the date on which the term of his office as such member would expire or where he contests any election to a House of Parliament or either House of the Legislature of a State, till the date on which he is declared elected, whichever is earlier.

Article 63: The Vice-President of India
(1) There shall be a Vice-President of India.
(2) The Vice-President shall be elected by the members of an electoral college consisting of the members of both Houses of Parliament in accordance with the system of proportional representation by means of the single transferable vote and the voting at such election shall be by secret ballot.
(3) The Vice-President shall hold office for a term of five years from the date on which he enters upon his office:
Provided that—
(a) a Vice-President may, by writing under his hand addressed to the President, resign his office;
(b) a Vice-President may be removed from his office by a resolution of the Council of States passed by a majority of all the then members of the Council and agreed to by the House of the People; but no resolution for the purpose of this clause shall be moved unless at least fourteen days' notice has been given of the intention to move the resolution;
(c) a Vice-President shall, notwithstanding the expiration of his term, continue to hold office until his successor enters upon his office.

Article 64: The Vice-President to be ex officio Chairman of the Council of States
The Vice-President shall be ex officio Chairman of the Council of States and shall not hold any other office of profit:
Provided that during any period when the Vice-President acts as President or discharges the functions of the President under article 65, he shall not perform the duties of the office of Chairman of the Council of States and shall not be entitled to any salary or allowance payable to the Chairman of the Council of States under article 97.

Article 65: The Vice-President to act as President or to discharge his functions during casual vacancies in the office, or during the absence, of President
(1) In the event of the occurrence of any vacancy in the office of the President by reason of his death, resignation or removal, or otherwise, the Vice-President shall act as President until a new President is elected and enters upon his office.
(2) When the President is unable to discharge his functions owing to absence, illness or any other cause, the Vice-President shall discharge his functions until the President resumes his duties.
(3) The Vice-President shall, during, and in respect of, the period while he is so acting as, or discharging the functions of, President, have all the powers and immunities of the President and be entitled to such emoluments, allowances and privileges as may be determined by Parliament by law and, until provision in that behalf is so made, such emoluments, allowances and privileges as are specified in the Second Schedule.

Article 66: Election of the Vice-President
(1) The Vice-President shall be elected by the members of an electoral college consisting of the members of both Houses of Parliament in accordance with the system of proportional representation by means of the single transferable vote and the voting at such election shall be by secret ballot.
(2) Any dispute arising in connection with the election of the Vice-President shall be inquired into and decided by the Supreme Court whose decision shall be final.

Article 67: Term of office of Vice-President
The Vice-President shall hold office for a term of five years from the date on which he enters upon his office: Provided that—
(a) a Vice-President may, by writing under his hand addressed to the President, resign his office;
(b) a Vice-President may be removed from his office by a resolution of the Council of States passed by a majority of all the then members of the Council and agreed to by the House of the People; but no resolution for the purpose of this clause shall be moved unless at least fourteen days' notice has been given of the intention to move the resolution;
(c) a resolution passed under clause (b) shall not take effect unless, in the case of the resolution being passed by the Council of States, it has been agreed to by the House of the People.

Article 68: Time of holding election to fill vacancy in the office of Vice-President
(1) An election to fill a vacancy caused by the expiration of the term of office of Vice-President shall be completed before the expiration of the term.
(2) An election to fill a vacancy in the office of Vice-President occurring by reason of his death, resignation or removal, or otherwise shall be held as soon as possible after the occurrence of the vacancy, and the person elected to fill the vacancy shall, subject to the provisions of Article 67, be entitled to hold office for the full term of five years from the date on which he enters upon his office.

Article 69: Oath or affirmation by the Vice-President
Every Vice-President shall, before entering upon his office, make and subscribe before the President, or some person appointed in that behalf by him, an oath or affirmation in the following form, that is to say—
'I, A.B., do swear in the name of God/solemnly affirm solemnly affirm that I will bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of India as by law established, that I will uphold the sovereignty and integrity of India, that I will faithfully and conscientiously discharge the duties upon which I am about to enter and that I will do right to all manner of people in accordance with the Constitution and the law, without fear or favour, affection or ill-will.'

Article 70: Disputes regarding the Speaker or Deputy Speaker
(1) If any dispute arises regarding the election of the Speaker or the Deputy Speaker of the House of the People, the dispute shall be referred to a committee of privileges consisting of members of both Houses in accordance with the provisions of law and rules made in that behalf for investigation and report to the House.
(2) While such a dispute is pending, no person shall act as Speaker or Deputy Speaker of the House of the People.

Article 71: Matters relating to, or connected with, the election of a President or Vice-President
(1) All doubts and disputes arising out of or in connection with the election of a President or Vice-President shall be inquired into and decided by the Supreme Court whose decision shall be final.
(2) If the election of a person as President or Vice-President is declared void by the Supreme Court, acts done by him in the exercise and performance of the powers and duties of the office of President or Vice-President, as the case may be, on or before the date of the decision of the Supreme Court shall not be invalidated by reason of that declaration.

Article 72: Power of President to grant pardons, etc., and to suspend, remit or commute sentences in certain cases
(1) The President shall have the power to grant pardons, reprieves, respites or remissions of punishment or to suspend, remit or commute the sentence of any person convicted of any offence—
(a) in all cases where the punishment or sentence is by a court martial;
(b) in all cases where the punishment or sentence is for an offence against any law relating to a matter to which the executive power of the Union extends;
(c) in all cases where the sentence is a sentence of death.
(2) Nothing in sub-clause (a) of clause (1) shall affect the power conferred by law on any officer of the Armed Forces of the Union to suspend, remit or commute a sentence passed by a court martial.

Article 73: Extent of the executive power of the Union
(1) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, the executive power of the Union shall extend—
(a) to the matters with respect to which Parliament has power to make laws; and
(b) to the exercise of such rights, authority and jurisdiction as are exercisable by the Government of India by virtue of any treaty or agreement:
Provided that the executive power referred to in sub-clause (a) shall not, save as expressly provided in this Constitution or in any law made by Parliament, extend in any State to matters with respect to which the Legislature of the State has also power to make laws.
(2) Until otherwise provided by Parliament, a State and any officer or authority of a State may, notwithstanding anything in this article, continue to exercise in matters with respect to which Parliament has power to make laws for that State such executive power or functions as the State or officer or authority thereof could exercise immediately before the commencement of this Constitution.

Article 74: Council of Ministers to aid and advise President
(1) There shall be a Council of Ministers with the Prime Minister at the head to aid and advise the President who shall, in the exercise of his functions, act in accordance with such advice.
(2) The question whether any, and if so what, advice was tendered by Ministers to the President shall not be inquired into in any court.
(3) The President shall not be bound to act in accordance with the advice tendered by Ministers to him, but he shall have the right to require the Council of Ministers to reconsider such advice, either generally or otherwise, and the President shall act in accordance with the advice tendered after such reconsideration.

Article 75: Council of Ministers
(1) The Prime Minister shall be appointed by the President and the other Ministers shall be appointed by the President on the advice of the Prime Minister.
(2) The Council of Ministers shall be collectively responsible to the House of the People.
(3) Before a Minister enters upon his office, the President shall administer to him the oaths of office and of secrecy according to the forms set out for the purpose in the Third Schedule.
(4) A Minister who for any period of six consecutive months is not a member of either House of Parliament shall at the expiration of that period cease to be a Minister.
(5) The salaries and allowances of Ministers shall be such as Parliament may from time to time by law determine and, until Parliament so determines, shall be as specified in the Second Schedule.

Article 76: Attorney General for India
(1) The President shall appoint a person who is qualified to be appointed a Judge of the Supreme Court to be Attorney General for India.
(2) It shall be the duty of the Attorney General to give advice to the Government of India upon such legal matters, and to perform such other duties of a legal character, as may from time to time be referred or assigned to him by the President, and to discharge the functions conferred on him by or under this Constitution or any other law for the time being in force.
(3) In the performance of his duties, the Attorney General shall have right of audience in all courts in the territory of India.
(4) The Attorney General shall hold office during the pleasure of the President, and shall receive such remuneration as the President may determine.

Article 77: Conduct of Business of the Government of India
(1) All executive action of the Government of India shall be expressed to be taken in the name of the President.
(2) Orders and other instruments made and executed in the name of the President shall be authenticated in such manner as may be specified in rules to be made by the President, and the validity of an order or instrument which is so authenticated shall not be called in question on the ground that it is not an order or instrument made or executed by the President.
(3) The President shall make rules for the more convenient transaction of the business of the Government of India, and for the allocation among Ministers of the said business.

Article 78: Duties of Prime Minister as respects the furnishing of information to the President, etc.
It shall be the duty of the Prime Minister—
(a) to communicate to the President all decisions of the Council of Ministers relating to the administration of the affairs of the Union and proposals for legislation;
(b) to furnish such information relating to the administration of the affairs of the Union and proposals for legislation as the President may call for; and
(c) if the President so requires, to submit for the consideration of the Council of Ministers any matter on which a decision has been taken by a Minister but which has not been considered by the Council.

Article 79: Constitution of Parliament
(1) There shall be a Parliament for the Union, which shall consist of the President and two Houses to be known respectively as the Council of States and the House of the People.
(2) The Council of States shall be elected by the members of the State Legislative Assemblies in accordance with the system of proportional representation by means of the single transferable vote.
(3) The House of the People shall be composed of—
(a) not more than five hundred and thirty members chosen by direct election from territorial constituencies in the States, and
(b) not more than twenty members to represent the Union territories, chosen in such manner as Parliament may by law provide.
(4) The allocation of seats in the Council of States to be filled by representatives of the States and in the House of the People to be filled by direct election shall be such as Parliament may by law determine.

Article 80: Composition of the Council of States
(1) The Council of States shall consist of—
(a) twelve members to be nominated by the President in accordance with the provisions of clause (3);
(b) representatives of the States and of the Union territories.
(2) The allocation of seats in the Council of States to be filled by representatives of the States and of the Union territories shall be in accordance with the provisions in that behalf contained in the Fourth Schedule.
(3) The President may nominate not more than two members of the Anglo-Indian community, if, in his opinion, that community is not adequately represented in the Council of States.

Article 81: Composition of the House of the People
(1) Subject to the provisions of article 331, the House of the People shall consist of—
(a) not more than five hundred and thirty members chosen by direct election from territorial constituencies in the States, and
(b) not more than twenty members to represent the Union territories, chosen in such manner as Parliament may by law provide.
(2) For the purposes of sub-clause (a) of clause (1), the expression “population” means the population as ascertained at the last preceding census of which the relevant figures have been published:
Provided that the reference in this sub-clause to the last preceding census of which the relevant figures have been published shall, until the relevant figures for the first census taken after the year 2026 have been published, be construed as a reference to the 2001 census.

Article 82: Readjustment after each census
(1) The representation of the States in the House of the People and the total number of seats in the House shall be readjusted after the completion of each census, and such readjustment shall take effect from such date as the President may by order specify.
(2) For the purposes of such readjustment, the extent of each territorial constituency shall be such that the ratio between the population of each constituency and the number of seats allotted to it shall, so far as practicable, be the same throughout the State.
(3) In this article, the expression "population" means the population as ascertained at the last preceding census of which the relevant figures have been published.

Article 83: Duration of Houses of Parliament
(1) The President shall from time to time summon each House of Parliament to meet at such time and place as he thinks fit, but six months shall not intervene between its last sitting in one session and the date appointed for its first sitting in the next session.
(2) The President may from time to time—
(a) prorogue the Houses or either House;
(b) dissolve the House of the People.
(3) The President shall not exercise his power under sub-clause (b) of clause (2) in relation to the House of the People unless—
(a) a resolution requesting him to do so has been passed by the House of the People by a majority of not less than two-thirds of the total membership of the House (including those who have been nominated under clause (1) of article 333); and
(b) the resolution has been agreed to by the Council of States.
(4) No resolution for the purpose of clause (3) shall be moved or voted upon unless—
(a) it has been ten days since the introduction of the resolution in the House of the People; and
(b) it has been seven days since the notice of the resolution has been given to the Speaker of the House of the People.
(5) Any resolution referred to in clause (4) shall be passed by each House by a majority of not less than two-thirds of the total membership of that House.

Article 84: Qualification for membership of Parliament
(1) A person shall not be qualified to be chosen to fill a seat in Parliament unless he—
(a) is a citizen of India, and makes and subscribes before some person authorized in that behalf by the Election Commission an oath or affirmation according to the form set out for the purpose in the Third Schedule; 
(b) is, in the case of a seat in the Council of States, not less than thirty years of age and, in the case of a seat in the House of the People, not less than twenty-five years of age; and 
(c) possesses such other qualifications as may be prescribed in that behalf by or under any law made by Parliament.
(2) A person shall not be eligible for election as a member of Parliament if he is so disqualified by or under any law made by Parliament.

Article 85: Sessions of Parliament, prorogation and dissolution
(1) The President shall from time to time summon each House of Parliament to meet at such time and place as he thinks fit, but six months shall not intervene between its last sitting in one session and the date appointed for its first sitting in the next session.
(2) The President may from time to time—
(a) prorogue the Houses or either House;
(b) dissolve the House of the People.
(3) The President shall not exercise his power under sub-clause (b) of clause (2) in relation to the House of the People unless—
(a) a resolution requesting him to do so has been passed by the House of the People by a majority of not less than two-thirds of the total membership of the House; and
(b) the resolution has been agreed to by the Council of States.
(4) No resolution for the purpose of clause (3) shall be moved or voted upon unless—
(a) it has been ten days since the introduction of the resolution in the House of the People; and
(b) it has been seven days since the notice of the resolution has been given to the Speaker of the House of the People.
(5) Any resolution referred to in clause (4) shall be passed by each House by a majority of not less than two-thirds of the total membership of that House.

Article 86: Right of the President to address and send messages to Houses
(1) The President may address either House of Parliament or both Houses assembled together, and for that purpose require the attendance of members.
(2) The President may send messages to either House of Parliament, whether with respect to a Bill then pending in Parliament or otherwise, and a House to which any message is so sent shall with all convenient dispatch consider any matter required by the message to be taken into consideration.

Article 87: Special address by the President
(1) At the commencement of the first session after each general election to the House of the People and at the commencement of the first session of each year, the President shall address both Houses of Parliament assembled together and inform Parliament of the causes of its summons.
(2) Provision shall be made by the rules regulating the procedure of either House for the allotment of time for discussion of the matters referred to in such address.

Article 88: Rights of Ministers and Attorney-General as respects Houses
(1) Every Minister and the Attorney-General of India shall have the right to speak in, and otherwise to take part in the proceedings of, either House, any joint sitting of the Houses, and any committee of Parliament of which he may be named a member, but shall not by virtue of this article be entitled to vote.
(2) The Chairman of the Council of States or Speaker of the House of the People, as the case may be, shall have the right to speak in, and otherwise to take part in the proceedings of, any committee of which he may be named a member, but shall not by virtue of this article be entitled to vote therein, and, notwithstanding anything in article 89, shall not, while acting as Chairman or Speaker, be entitled to vote in the House, but shall have and exercise all other rights of a member of that House.

Article 89: Special provisions as to financial Bills
(1) A Bill or amendment making provision for any of the matters specified in sub-clauses (a) to (f) of clause (1) of article 110 shall not be introduced or moved except on the recommendation of the President and a Bill making such provision shall not be introduced in the Council of States:
Provided that no recommendation shall be required under this clause for the moving of an amendment making provision for the reduction or abolition of any tax.
(2) A Money Bill shall not be introduced in the Council of States.
(3) After a Money Bill has been passed by the House of the People it shall be transmitted to the Council of States for its recommendations and the Council of States shall within a period of fourteen days from the date of its receipt of the Bill return the Bill to the House of the People with its recommendations, and the House of the People may thereupon either accept or reject all or any of the recommendations of the Council of States.
(4) If the House of the People accepts any of the recommendations of the Council of States, the Money Bill shall be deemed to have been passed by both Houses with the amendments recommended by the Council of States and accepted by the House of the People.
(5) If the House of the People does not accept any of the recommendations of the Council of States, the Money Bill shall be deemed to have been passed by both Houses in the form in which it was passed by the House of the People without any of the amendments recommended by the Council of States.

Article 90: Vacation and resignation of, and removal from, the offices of Speaker and Deputy Speaker
(1) If a motion for the removal of the Speaker from his office is passed by a majority of all the then members of the House, notice thereof shall be given to the Speaker in writing signed by not less than one-fourth of the total number of members of the House.
(2) The Speaker shall not preside at any sitting of the House when a resolution for his removal from office is under consideration.
(3) The Deputy Speaker shall act as Speaker when the latter is unable to perform his functions due to absence or otherwise.
(4) The Speaker may, by writing under his hand, resign his office.
(5) Subject to the provisions of clause (4), whenever the office of the Speaker is vacant, the duties of the office shall be performed by such member of the House as the President may appoint for the purpose.

Article 91: Power of President to promulgate Ordinances during recess of Parliament
(1) If at any time, except when both Houses of Parliament are in session, the President is satisfied that circumstances exist which render it necessary for him to take immediate action, he may promulgate such Ordinance as the circumstances appear to him to require.
(2) An Ordinance promulgated under this article shall have the same force and effect as an Act of Parliament, but every such Ordinance—
(a) shall be laid before both Houses of Parliament and shall cease to operate at the expiration of six weeks from the reassembly of Parliament, or, if before the expiration of that period resolutions disapproving it are passed by both Houses, upon the passing of the second of those resolutions; and
(b) may be withdrawn at any time by the President Explanation.—Where the Houses of Parliament are summoned to reassemble on different dates, the period of six weeks shall be reckoned from the later of those dates for the purposes of this clause.

Article 92: Speaker and Deputy Speaker of the House of the People
(1) The House of the People shall, as soon as may be, choose two members of the House to be respectively Speaker and Deputy Speaker thereof and, so often as the office of Speaker or Deputy Speaker becomes vacant, the House shall choose another member to be Speaker or Deputy Speaker, as the case may be.
(2) The Speaker or the Deputy Speaker shall vacate his office—
(a) if he ceases to be a member of the House of the People;
(b) if he resigns by writing under his hand addressed to the President; or
(c) if he is removed from office by a resolution of the House of the People passed by a majority of all the then members of the House:
Provided that no resolution for the purpose of clause (c) shall be moved unless at least fourteen days' notice has been given of the intention to move the resolution:
Provided further that, whenever the House of the People is dissolved, the Speaker shall not vacate his office until immediately before the first meeting of the House of the People after the dissolution.

Article 93: Special procedure in respect of Money Bills
(1) A Money Bill shall not be introduced in the Council of States.
(2) After a Money Bill has been passed by the House of the People it shall be transmitted to the Council of States for its recommendations and the Council of States shall within a period of fourteen days from the date of its receipt of the Bill return the Bill to the House of the People with its recommendations, and the House of the People may thereupon either accept or reject all or any of the recommendations of the Council of States.
(3) If the House of the People accepts any of the recommendations of the Council of States, the Money Bill shall be deemed to have been passed by both Houses with the amendments recommended by the Council of States and accepted by the House of the People.
(4) If the House of the People does not accept any of the recommendations of the Council of States, the Money Bill shall be deemed to have been passed by both Houses in the form in which it was passed by the House of the People without any of the amendments recommended by the Council of States.

Article 94: Vacation and resignation of, and removal from, the offices of Chairman and Deputy Chairman
(1) If a motion for the removal of the Chairman from his office is passed by a majority of all the then members of the Council, notice thereof shall be given to the Chairman in writing signed by not less than one-fourth of the total number of members of the Council.
(2) The Chairman shall not preside at any sitting of the Council when a resolution for his removal from office is under consideration.
(3) The Deputy Chairman shall act as Chairman when the latter is unable to perform his functions due to absence or otherwise.
(4) The Chairman may, by writing under his hand, resign his office.
(5) Subject to the provisions of clause (4), whenever the office of the Chairman is vacant, the duties of the office shall be performed by such member of the Council as the Vice-President may appoint for the purpose.

Article 95: Rules of Procedure
(1) Each House of Parliament may make rules for regulating, subject to the provisions of this Constitution, its procedure and the conduct of its business.
(2) Until rules are made under clause (1), the rules of procedure and standing orders in force immediately before the commencement of this Constitution with respect to the Legislature of the Dominion of India shall have effect in relation to the Houses of Parliament subject to such modifications and adaptations as may be made therein by the Chairman of the Council of States or the Speaker of the House of the People, as the case may be.
(3) The President, after consultation with the Chairman of the Council of States and the Speaker of the House of the People, may make rules as to the procedure with respect to joint sittings of, and communications between, the two Houses.

Article 96: The Vice-President of India
(1) There shall be a Vice-President of India.
(2) The Vice-President shall be elected by the members of an electoral college consisting of the members of both Houses of Parliament in accordance with the system of proportional representation by means of the single transferable vote and the voting at such election shall be by secret ballot.
(3) The Vice-President shall hold office for a term of five years from the date on which he enters upon his office:
Provided that—
(a) a person holding office as Vice-President immediately before the commencement of this Constitution shall, unless he sooner resigns or is removed from office in accordance with the provisions of this article, continue to hold the office for the term for which he was elected under the provisions of the Constitution as in force immediately before such commencement;
(b) the election of the first Vice-President elected under this Constitution shall be completed before the expiration of the term of office of the Vice-President holding office immediately before the commencement of this Constitution.

Article 97: Salaries and allowances of members
(1) Members of either House of Parliament shall be entitled to receive such salaries and allowances as may from time to time be determined by Parliament by law and, until provision in that behalf is so made, salaries and allowances at such rates and upon such conditions as were immediately before the commencement of this Constitution applicable in the case of members of the Constituent Assembly of the Dominion of India.
(2) If provision has been made by law made by Parliament under clause (1) for the payment of salaries and allowances to members of either House of Parliament, no modification of the law shall affect the salary or allowances of a member of that House during the term of office of the member then in existence.

Article 98: Secretariat of Parliament
(1) Each House of Parliament shall have a separate secretarial staff:
Provided that nothing in this clause shall be construed as preventing the creation of posts common to both Houses of Parliament.
(2) Parliament may by law regulate the recruitment and the conditions of service of persons appointed to the secretarial staff of either House of Parliament.

Article 99: Oath or affirmation by members
(1) Every member of either House of Parliament shall, before taking his seat, make and subscribe before the President, or some person appointed in that behalf by him, an oath or affirmation according to the form set out for the purpose in the Third Schedule.
(2) A member may at any time after taking his seat give in writing to the President or to the person so appointed resigning his membership.
(3) The President or the person appointed in that behalf by him shall inform the House concerned of every resignation received under clause (2).

Article 100: Voting in Houses, Power of Houses to act notwithstanding vacancies and quorum
(1) Save as otherwise provided in this Constitution, all questions at any sitting of either House or joint sitting of the Houses shall be determined by a majority of votes of the members present and voting, other than the Speaker or person acting as Chairman or Speaker.
(2) The Speaker or person acting as Chairman or Speaker shall not vote in the first instance, but shall have and exercise a casting vote in the case of an equality of votes.
(3) Save as otherwise provided in this Constitution, all matters shall be decided by a majority of votes of the members present and voting, other than the Speaker or person acting as Chairman or Speaker.
(4) There shall be no quorum fixed for the purpose of constituting a sitting of either House of Parliament.

Article 101: Vacation of seats
(1) No person shall be a member both of Parliament and of the Legislature of a State: Provided that nothing in this clause shall apply to any person chosen to fill a vacancy in the Council of States under sub-clause (b) of clause (1) of article 80, or elected to the House of the People or the Legislative Assembly of a State while he is holding office as President of the Council of States or Speaker of the House of the People or Speaker or Deputy Speaker of the Legislative Assembly of the State.
(2) If a person sits or votes as a member of either House of Parliament or of a Legislative Assembly of a State when he is not entitled to do so, his seat shall thereupon become vacant.

Article 102: Disqualifications for Membership
(1) A person shall be disqualified for being chosen as, and for being, a member of either House of Parliament—
(a) if he holds any office of profit under the Government of India or the Government of any State, other than an office declared by Parliament by law not to disqualify its holder;
(b) if he is of unsound mind and stands so declared by a competent court;
(c) if he is an undischarged insolvent;
(d) if he is not a citizen of India, or has voluntarily acquired the citizenship of a foreign State, or is under any acknowledgment of allegiance or adherence to a foreign State;
(e) if he is so disqualified by or under any law made by Parliament.
(2) A person shall be disqualified for being a member of either House of Parliament if he is so disqualified under the Tenth Schedule.

Article 103: Decision on questions as to disqualifications of members
(1) If any question arises as to whether a member of either House of Parliament has become subject to any of the disqualifications mentioned in clause (1) of article 102, the question shall be referred for the decision of the President and his decision shall be final.
(2) Before giving any decision on any such question, the President shall obtain the opinion of the Election Commission and shall act according to such opinion.

Article 104: Decision on questions as to disqualifications of members
(1) If any question arises as to whether a member of a House of Parliament has become subject to any of the disqualifications mentioned in clause (1) of Article 102, the question shall be referred for the decision of the President and his decision shall be final.
(2) Before giving any decision on any such question, the President shall obtain the opinion of the Election Commission and shall act according to such opinion.

Article 105: Powers, privileges, etc., of the Houses of Parliament and of the members and committees thereof
(1) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution and the rules and standing orders regulating the procedure of Parliament, there shall be freedom of speech in Parliament.
(2) No member of Parliament shall be liable to any proceedings in any court in respect of anything said or any vote given by him in Parliament or any committee thereof, and no person shall be so liable in respect of the publication by or under the authority of either House of Parliament of any report, paper, votes or proceedings.
(3) In other respects, the powers, privileges and immunities of each House of Parliament, and of the members and the committees of each House, shall be such as may from time to time be defined by Parliament by law, and until so defined, shall be those of the House of Commons of the Parliament of the United Kingdom, and of its members and committees, at the commencement of this Constitution.

Article 106: Salaries and Allowances of Members
(1) There shall be paid to the Members of either House of Parliament such salaries and allowances as may from time to time be determined by Parliament by law and, until provision in that behalf is so made, such salaries and allowances as are specified in the Second Schedule.
(2) Until provision is made by Parliament under clause (1), the President may, by order, fix the salaries and allowances of Members:
Provided that any order made under this clause shall be laid before both Houses of Parliament.

Article 107: Provisions as to introduction and passing of Bills
(1) Subject to the provisions of Articles 109 and 117 with respect to Money Bills and other financial Bills, a Bill may originate in either House of Parliament:
Provided that the President shall not give his assent to a Bill unless it has been recommended by the Governor of a State.
(2) A Bill pending in Parliament shall not lapse by reason of the prorogation of the Houses.
(3) A Bill pending in the Council of States which has not been passed by the House of the People shall not lapse on a dissolution of the House of the People.
(4) A Bill which is pending in the Council of States, or which having been passed by the Council of States is pending in the House of the People, shall, subject to the provisions of Article 108, lapse on a dissolution of the Council of States.

Article 108: Joint sitting of both Houses of Parliament
(1) If after a Bill has been passed by one House and transmitted to the other House—
(a) the Bill is rejected by the other House; or
(b) the Houses have finally disagreed as to the amendments to be made in the Bill; or
(c) more than six months elapse from the date of the reception of the Bill by the other House without the Bill being passed by it,
the President may, unless the Bill has lapsed by reason of a dissolution of the Houses, notify to the Houses by message if they are sitting or by public notification if they are not sitting, his intention to summon them to meet in a joint sitting for the purpose of deliberating and voting on the Bill:
Provided that nothing in this clause shall apply to a Money Bill.
(2) The President shall summon the Houses to meet in a joint sitting at a time and place appointed by him and shall preside over the joint sitting.

Article 109: Special procedure in respect of Money Bills
(1) A Money Bill shall not be introduced in the Council of States.
(2) After a Money Bill has been passed by the House of the People, it shall be transmitted to the Council of States for its recommendations, and the Council of States shall within a period of fourteen days from the date of its receipt of the Bill return the Bill to the House of the People with its recommendations, and the House of the People may thereupon either accept or reject all or any of the recommendations of the Council of States.
(3) If the House of the People accepts any of the recommendations of the Council of States, the Money Bill shall be deemed to have been passed by both Houses with the amendments recommended by the Council of States and accepted by the House of the People.
(4) If the House of the People does not accept any of the recommendations of the Council of States, the Money Bill shall be deemed to have been passed by both Houses in the form in which it was passed by the House of the People without any of the amendments recommended by the Council of States.
(5) A Money Bill shall not be recommitted to the House of the People or the Council of States for reconsideration.

Article 110: Definition of Money Bills
(1) For the purposes of this Chapter, a Bill shall be deemed to be a Money Bill if it contains only provisions dealing with all or any of the following matters, namely:
(a) the imposition, abolition, remission, alteration or regulation of any tax;
(b) the regulation of the borrowing of money or the giving of any guarantee by the Government of India, or the amendment of the law with respect to any financial obligations undertaken or to be undertaken by the Government of India;
(c) the custody of the Consolidated Fund or the Contingency Fund of India, the payment of moneys into or the withdrawal of moneys from any such Fund;
(d) the appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated Fund of India;
(e) the declaring of any expenditure to be expenditure charged on the Consolidated Fund of India or the increasing of the amount of any such expenditure;
(f) the receipt of money on account of the Consolidated Fund of India or the public account of India or the custody or issue of such money or the audit of the accounts of the Union or of a State; or
(g) any matter incidental to any of the matters specified in sub-clauses (a) to (f).
(2) A Bill shall not be deemed to be a Money Bill by reason only that it provides for the imposition of fines or other pecuniary penalties, or for the demand or payment of fees for licences or fees for services rendered, or by reason that it provides for the imposition, abolition, remission, alteration or regulation of any tax by any local authority or body for local purposes.

Article 111: Assent to Bills
(1) When a Bill has been passed by both Houses of Parliament, it shall be presented to the President, and the President shall declare either that he assents to the Bill or that he withholds assent therefrom or that he reserves the Bill for the consideration of the President.
(2) A Bill reserved for the consideration of the President shall not become law unless the President has declared his assent thereto.
(3) Nothing in this article shall apply to a Money Bill.

Article 112: Annual financial statement
(1) The President shall in respect of every financial year cause to be laid before both the Houses of Parliament a statement of the estimated receipts and expenditure of the Government of India for that year, in this Part referred to as the 'annual financial statement'.
(2) The estimates of expenditure embodied in the annual financial statement shall show separately:
(a) the sums required to meet expenditure described by this Constitution as expenditure charged upon the Consolidated Fund of India; and
(b) the sums required to meet other expenditure proposed to be made from the Consolidated Fund of India, and shall distinguish expenditure on revenue account from other expenditure.
(3) The following expenditure shall be expenditure charged on the Consolidated Fund of India:
(a) the emoluments and allowances of the President and other expenditure relating to his office;
(b) the salaries and allowances of the Chairman and the Deputy Chairman of the Council of States and the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker of the House of the People;
(c) debt charges for which the Government of India is liable including interest, sinking fund charges and redemption charges, and other expenditure relating to the raising of loans and the service and redemption of debt;
(d) the salaries, allowances and pensions payable to or in respect of Judges of the Supreme Court;
(e) the pensions payable to or in respect of Judges of the Federal Court;
(f) the pensions payable to or in respect of Judges of any High Court which exercises jurisdiction in relation to any area included in the territory of India or which at any time before the commencement of this Constitution exercised jurisdiction in relation to any area included in an Acceding State;
(g) the pensions payable to or in respect of Judges of any High Court with respect to which agreements have been made under article 258A;
(h) the pensions payable to or in respect of persons who have held office as Comptroller and Auditor-General of India and who have retired or have ceased to hold office;
(i) any other expenditure declared by this Constitution or by Parliament by law to be so charged.
(4) If in respect of any financial year it is found that the amount authorized to be expended for a particular service for the current financial year is insufficient or that a need has arisen for expenditure upon some new service not contemplated in the annual financial statement for that year, or that any money has been spent on any service during a financial year in excess of the amount granted for that service for that year, the President shall have power to authorise expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India whether or not it is covered by the annual financial statement and whether or not it is within the limits of the appropriation made by law passed under clause (1) of article 114.

Article 113: Procedure in the Legislature of Bills relating to imposition, abolition, remission, alteration or regulation of any tax
(1) A Bill or amendment making provision for any of the matters specified in sub-clauses (a) to (f) of clause (2) of article 110 shall not be introduced or moved except on the recommendation of the President and a Bill making such provision shall not be introduced in the Council of States:
Provided that no recommendation shall be required under this clause for the moving of an amendment making provision for the reduction or abolition of any tax.
(2) A Bill or amendment shall not be deemed to make provision for any of the matters aforesaid by reason only that it provides for the imposition of fines or other pecuniary penalties, or for the demand or payment of fees for licences or fees for services rendered, or by reason that it provides for the imposition, abolition, remission, alteration or regulation of any tax by any local authority or body for local purposes.
(3) A certified copy of the recommendation of the President under clause (1) with respect to any Bill or amendment shall be laid before the House or Houses of Parliament in which such Bill or amendment is introduced.

Article 114: Appropriation Bills
(1) As soon as may be after the grants under article 113 have been made by the House of the People, there shall be introduced a Bill to provide for the appropriation out of the Consolidated Fund of India of all moneys required to meet—
(a) the grants so made by the House of the People; and
(b) the expenditure charged on the Consolidated Fund of India but not exceeding in any case the amount shown in the statement previously laid before Parliament.
(2) No amendment shall be proposed to any such Bill in either House of Parliament which will have the effect of varying the amount or altering the destination of any grant so made or of varying the amount of any expenditure charged on the Consolidated Fund of India, and the decision of the person presiding as to whether an amendment is admissible under this clause shall be final.

Article 115: Supplementary, additional or excess grants
(1) The President shall cause to be laid before both the Houses of Parliament any such estimate as is mentioned in article 112 or any such statement as is mentioned in article 113 in respect of the financial year next ensuing, showing the estimated receipts and expenditure of the Government of India for that year.
(2) The President shall also cause to be laid before both the Houses of Parliament a statement of the estimated receipts and expenditure of the Government of India for any period of not less than four months which may be specified in that behalf by or under any law made by Parliament.
(3) The estimates of expenditure embodied in the annual financial statement shall show separately—
(a) the sums required to meet expenditure charged upon the Consolidated Fund of India; and
(b) the sums required to meet other expenditure proposed to be made from the Consolidated Fund of India, and shall distinguish expenditure on revenue account from other expenditure.
(4) No grant shall be made by the Legislature of a State except on the recommendation of the Governor.

Article 116: Votes on Account, etc.
(1) Notwithstanding anything in the foregoing provisions of this Chapter, the House of the People shall have power
to make any grant in advance in respect of the estimated expenditure for a part of any financial year pending the completion of the procedure prescribed in article 113 for the voting of such grant and the passing of the law in accordance with the provisions of article 114 in relation to that expenditure.
(2) The making of any grant or the giving of any loan out of the Consolidated Fund of India in advance of the enactment of the law in this behalf shall be regulated by law enacted by Parliament and, until provision in that behalf is so made, shall require the sanction of the President.
(3) No money shall be withdrawn from the Consolidated Fund of India except under appropriation made by law passed in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter.

Article 117: Special Procedure in respect of Money Bills
(1) A Bill or amendment making provision for any of the matters specified in sub-clauses (a) to (g) of clause (1) of article 110 shall be deemed to be a Money Bill:
Provided that a Bill or amendment shall not be deemed to be a Money Bill by reason only that it provides for the imposition of fines or other pecuniary penalties, or for the demand or payment of fees for licences or fees for services rendered, or by reason that it provides for the imposition, abolition, remission, alteration or regulation of any tax by any local authority or body for local purposes.
(2) A Money Bill shall not be introduced in the Council of States.
(3) After a Money Bill has been passed by the House of the People it shall be transmitted to the Council of States for its recommendations and the Council of States shall within fourteen days of the receipt of the Bill return the Bill to the House of the People with its recommendations and the House of the People may thereupon either accept or reject all or any of the recommendations of the Council of States.
(4) If the House of the People accepts any of the recommendations of the Council of States, the Money Bill shall be deemed to have been passed by both Houses with the amendments recommended by the Council of States and accepted by the House of the People.
(5) If the House of the People does not accept any of the recommendations of the Council of States, the Money Bill shall be deemed to have been passed by both Houses in the form in which it was passed by the House of the People without any of the amendments recommended by the Council of States.
(6) If a Money Bill passed by the House of the People and transmitted to the Council of States for its recommendations is not returned to the House of the People within the said period of fourteen days, it shall be deemed to have been passed by both Houses at the expiration of the said period in the form in which it was passed by the House of the People.

Article 118: Rules of Procedure
(1) Each House of Parliament may make rules for regulating, subject to the provisions of this Constitution, its procedure and the conduct of its business.
(2) Until rules are made under clause (1), the House of Commons of the Parliament of the United Kingdom and any rules of procedure which were in force immediately before the commencement of this Constitution shall have effect in relation to Parliament subject to such modifications and adaptations as may be made therein by the Chairman of the Council of States or the Speaker of the House of the People, as the case may be.
(3) The President, after consultation with the Chairman of the Council of States and the Speaker of the House of the People, may make rules as to the procedure with respect to any matter connected with the functioning of either House of Parliament.

Article 119: Regulation by law of procedure in Parliament in relation to financial business
(1) The President shall cause every proposal for a demand or any appropriation out of the Consolidated Fund of India, to be submitted to the House of the People for the sanction of the President and, except as otherwise provided in this Constitution, no demand or appropriation so made shall be submitted for the sanction of the President unless it is recommended by the Governor-General.
(2) No discussion shall take place in Parliament on the annual financial statement or on any Bill or amendment for the purpose of providing for the imposition of any tax or for the variation of any duty in respect of any such statement or for the continuation of any such duty.
(3) Nothing in article 116 or article 117 or article 118 shall apply to any such Bill or amendment as is referred to in clause (2).

Article 120: Language to be used in Parliament
(1) Except as provided by this Constitution, business in Parliament shall be transacted in Hindi or in English:
Provided that the Chairman of the Council of States or Speaker of the House of the People, or person acting as such, as the case may be, may permit any member who cannot adequately express himself in Hindi or in English to address the House in his mother-tongue.
(2) Unless Parliament by law otherwise provides, this article shall, after the expiration of a period of fifteen years from the commencement of this Constitution, have effect as if the words "or in English" were omitted therefrom.

Article 121: Restriction on discussion in Parliament
(1) No discussion shall take place in Parliament with respect to the conduct of any Judge of the Supreme Court or of a High Court in the discharge of his duties except upon a motion for presenting an address to the President praying for the removal of the Judge as hereinafter provided.
(2) Nothing in clause (1) shall apply—
(a) to the discussion in Parliament of the annual report of the working of the Supreme Court or of a High Court, or
(b) to any matter relating to the administration of justice with which the Legislature of a State has power to make laws.

Article 122: Courts not to inquire into proceedings of Parliament
(1) The validity of any proceedings in Parliament shall not be called in question on the ground of any alleged irregularity of procedure.
(2) No officer or member of Parliament in whom powers are vested by or under this Constitution for regulating procedure or the conduct of business, or for maintaining order, in Parliament shall be subject to the jurisdiction of any court in respect of the exercise by him of those powers.

Article 123: Power of the President to promulgate ordinances during recess of Parliament
(1) If at any time, except when both Houses of Parliament are in session, the President is satisfied that circumstances exist which render it necessary for him to take immediate action, he may promulgate such Ordinance as the circumstances appear to him to require.
(2) An Ordinance promulgated under this article shall have the same force and effect as an Act of Parliament, but every such Ordinance—
(a) shall be laid before both Houses of Parliament and shall cease to operate at the expiration of six weeks from the reassembly of Parliament, or, if before the expiration of that period resolutions disapproving it are passed by both Houses, upon the passing of the second of those resolutions; and
(b) may be withdrawn at any time by the President Explanation.—Where the Houses of Parliament are summoned to reassemble on different dates, the period of six weeks shall be reckoned from the later of those dates for the purposes of this clause.

Article 124: Establishment and Constitution of Supreme Court
(1) There shall be a Supreme Court of India consisting of a Chief Justice of India and, until Parliament by law prescribes a larger number, of not more than seven other Judges.
(2) Every Judge of the Supreme Court shall be appointed by the President by warrant under his hand and seal after consultation with such of the Judges of the Supreme Court and of the High Courts in the States as the President may deem necessary for the purpose and shall hold office until he attains the age of sixty-five years:
Provided that in the case of appointment of a Judge other than the Chief Justice, the Chief Justice of India shall always be consulted:
Provided further that—
(a) a Judge may, by writing under his hand addressed to the President, resign his office;
(b) a Judge may be removed from his office in the manner provided in clause (4).
(3) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as a Judge of the Supreme Court unless he is a citizen of India and—
(a) has been for at least five years a Judge of a High Court or of two or more such Courts in succession; or
(b) has been for at least ten years an advocate of a High Court or of two or more such Courts in succession; or
(c) is, in the opinion of the President, a distinguished jurist.
(4) A Judge of the Supreme Court shall not be removed from his office except by an order of the President passed after an address by each House of Parliament supported by a majority of the total membership of that House and by a majority of not less than two-thirds of the members of that House present and voting has been presented to the President in the same session for such removal on the ground of proved misbehaviour or incapacity.

Article 125: Salaries and allowances of the Judges
(1) There shall be paid to the Judges of the Supreme Court such salaries as may be determined by Parliament by law and, until provision in that behalf is so made, such salaries as are specified in the Second Schedule.
(2) Every Judge shall be entitled to such allowances and to such rights in respect of leave of absence and pension as may from time to time be determined by or under law made by Parliament and, until so determined, to such allowances and rights as are specified in the Second Schedule.

Article 126: Annual Financial Statement
(1) The President shall in respect of every financial year cause to be laid before both the Houses of Parliament a statement of the estimated receipts and expenditure of the Government of India for that year, in this Part referred to as the “annual financial statement”.
(2) The estimates of expenditure embodied in the annual financial statement shall show separately—
(a) the sums required to meet expenditure described by this Constitution as expenditure charged upon the Consolidated Fund of India; and
(b) the sums required to meet other expenditure proposed to be made from the Consolidated Fund of India, and shall distinguish expenditure on revenue account from other expenditure.
(3) The following expenditure shall be expenditure charged on the Consolidated Fund of India—
(a) the emoluments and allowances of the President and other expenditure relating to his office;
(b) the salaries and allowances of the Chairman and the Deputy Chairman of the Council of States and the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker of the House of the People;
(c) the debt charges for which the Government of India is liable, including interest, sinking fund charges and redemption charges, and other expenditure relating to the raising of loans and the service and redemption of debt;
(d) the salary, allowances and pension payable to or in respect of the Judges of the Supreme Court;
(e) the salary, allowances and pension payable to or in respect of the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India;
(f) any other expenditure declared by this Constitution or by Parliament by law to be so charged.

Article 127: Appointment of ad hoc judges
(1) If at any time there should not be a quorum of the Judges of the Supreme Court available to hold or continue any session of the Court, the Chief Justice of India may, with the previous consent of the President and after consultation with the Chief Justice of the High Court concerned, request in writing the attendance at the sittings of the Court, as an ad hoc Judge, for such period as may be necessary, of a Judge of a High Court duly qualified for appointment as a Judge of the Supreme Court to be designated by the Chief Justice of India.
(2) It shall be the duty of the Judge who has been so designated, in priority to other duties of his office, to attend the sittings of the Supreme Court at the time and for the period for which his attendance is required, and while so attending he shall have all the jurisdiction, powers and privileges, and shall discharge the duties, of a Judge of the Supreme Court.

Article 128: The Supreme Court to be a court of record.
(1) The Supreme Court shall be a court of record and shall have all the powers of such a court including the power to punish for contempt of itself.
(2) Subject to the provisions of any law made by Parliament, the Supreme Court may, by virtue of this article, issue such directions, orders or writs as may be necessary for doing complete justice in any cause or matter pending before it, including orders for the investigation of any offence committed in relation to any cause or matter under its jurisdiction.
(3) The Supreme Court shall have power to review any judgment pronounced or order made by it.

Article 129: Supreme Court to be a court of record
The Supreme Court shall be a court of record and shall have all the powers of such a court including the power to punish for contempt of itself.

Article 130: Seat of Supreme Court
The Supreme Court shall sit in Delhi or in such other place or places, as the Chief Justice of India may, with the approval of the President, from time to time, appoint.

Article 131: Original jurisdiction of the Supreme Court
(1) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, the Supreme Court shall, to the exclusion of any other court, have original jurisdiction in any dispute—
(a) between the Government of India and one or more States; or
(b) between the Government of India and any State or States on one side and one or more other States on the other; or
(c) between two or more States,
if and in so far as the dispute involves any question (whether of law or fact) on which the existence or extent of a legal right depends.
(2) In the exercise of its original jurisdiction under this article, the Supreme Court shall have all the powers of such a court including the power to grant injunctions.

Article 132: Appellate jurisdiction of the Supreme Court in constitutional matters
(1) An appeal shall lie to the Supreme Court from any judgment, decree or final order of a High Court in the territory of India, whether in a civil, criminal or other proceeding, if the High Court certifies under article 134A—
(a) that the case involves a substantial question of law as to the interpretation of this Constitution; and
(b) that in the opinion of the High Court, the said question needs to be decided by the Supreme Court.
(2) Notwithstanding anything in article 132, any party appealing to the Supreme Court under clause (1) may urge as one of the grounds in such appeal that a substantial question of law as to the interpretation of this Constitution has been wrongly decided.

Article 133: Appellate jurisdiction of the Supreme Court in civil matters
(1) An appeal shall lie to the Supreme Court from any judgment, decree or final order in a civil proceeding of a High Court in the territory of India if the High Court certifies under article 134A—
(a) that the case involves a substantial question of law of general importance; and
(b) that in the opinion of the High Court, the said question needs to be decided by the Supreme Court.
(2) Notwithstanding anything in article 132, any party appealing to the Supreme Court under clause (1) may urge as one of the grounds in such appeal that a substantial question of law as to the interpretation of this Constitution has been wrongly decided.

Article 134: Certificate for appeal to the Supreme Court
(1) An appeal shall lie to the Supreme Court from any judgment, decree or final order in a criminal proceeding of a High Court in the territory of India if the High Court—
(a) has on appeal reversed an order of acquittal of an accused person and sentenced him to death; or
(b) has withdrawn for trial before itself any case from any court subordinate to its authority and has in such trial convicted the accused person and sentenced him to death; or
(c) certifies that the case is a fit one for appeal to the Supreme Court.
(2) Where such a certificate is given, any party in the case may appeal to the Supreme Court on the ground that any question of law of general importance was involved in the decision of the High Court, and it appears to the Supreme Court that a substantial question of law of general importance is involved in any such case, the Supreme Court may consider the matter even without a certificate from the High Court.

Article 135: Jurisdiction and powers of the Federal Court under existing law
(1) The jurisdiction and powers of the Federal Court under any law for the time being in force shall be exercisable by the Supreme Court.
(2) Any reference to the Federal Court in any existing law shall be construed as a reference to the Supreme Court.
(3) The Supreme Court shall have all the powers of the Federal Court to hear and determine any appeal from any judgment, decree or final order of any High Court or other court mentioned in clause (1) and to decide any question of law of general importance that may arise in any such case.

Article 136: Special leave to appeal by the Supreme Court
(1) Notwithstanding anything in this Chapter, the Supreme Court may, in its discretion, grant special leave to appeal from any judgment, decree, determination, sentence or order in any cause or matter passed or made by any court or tribunal in the territory of India.
(2) Nothing in clause (1) shall apply to any judgment, determination, sentence or order passed or made by any court or tribunal constituted by or under any law relating to the Armed Forces.

Article 137: Review and curative petitions
(1) Subject to the provisions of any law made by Parliament or any rules made under article 145, the Supreme Court shall have power to review any judgment pronounced or order made by it.
(2) The Supreme Court shall also have the power to review any judgment pronounced or order made by it after the enactment of laws made by Parliament conferring such powers on it.
(3) The Supreme Court may, in its discretion, review any judgment pronounced or order made by it.
(4) No judgment shall be delivered by the Supreme Court save as provided for by this Constitution or by any law made by Parliament.
(5) Nothing in this article shall be construed as restricting the power of the Supreme Court to review any judgment pronounced or order made by it.

Article 138: Enacting formula for Bills other than Money Bills
(1) A Bill pending in Parliament shall not lapse by reason of the prorogation of the Houses.
(2) A Bill pending in the Council of States which has not been passed by the House of the People shall not lapse on a dissolution of the House of the People.
(3) A Bill which is pending in the House of the People, or which having been passed by the House of the People is pending in the Council of States, shall, subject to the provisions of article 108 or, as the case may be, article 109, lapse on a dissolution of the House of the People.
(4) A Bill which is pending in the Council of States and which has not been passed by the House of the People shall, subject to the provisions of article 108, lapse on a dissolution of the Council of States.

Article 139: Conferment on the Supreme Court of powers to issue certain writs
(1) Parliament may by law confer on the Supreme Court power to issue directions, orders or writs, including writs in the nature of habeas corpus, mandamus, prohibition, quo warranto and certiorari, whichever may be appropriate, for the enforcement of any of the rights conferred by Part III and for any other purpose.
(2) The power conferred on a High Court by clauses (2) and (4) of article 226 shall not be in derogation of the power conferred on the Supreme Court by clause (1).

Article 140: Auditor-General of India
(1) There shall be an Auditor-General of India who shall be appointed by the President.
(2) Every person appointed to be the Auditor-General of India shall, before he enters upon his office, make and subscribe before the President, or some person appointed in that behalf by him, an oath or affirmation according to the form set out for the purpose in the Third Schedule.
(3) The salary and other conditions of service of the Auditor-General shall be such as may be determined by Parliament by law and, until they are so determined, shall be as specified in the Second Schedule: Provided that neither the salary of the Auditor-General nor his rights in respect of leave of absence, pension or age of retirement shall be varied to his disadvantage after his appointment.

Article 141: Law declared by Supreme Court to be binding on all courts
The law declared by the Supreme Court shall be binding on all courts within the territory of India.

Article 142: Enforcement of decrees and orders of Supreme Court and orders as to discovery, etc.
(1) The Supreme Court in the exercise of its jurisdiction may pass such decree or make such order as is necessary for doing complete justice in any cause or matter pending before it, and any decree so passed or order so made shall be enforceable throughout the territory of India in such manner as may be prescribed by or under any law made by Parliament and, until provision in that behalf is so made, in such manner as the President may by order prescribe.
(2) Subject to the provisions of any law made in this behalf by Parliament, the Supreme Court shall, as respects the whole of the territory of India, have all and every power to make any order for the purpose of securing the attendance of any person, the discovery or production of any documents, or the investigation or punishment of any contempt of itself.

Article 143: Power of the President to consult Supreme Court
(1) If at any time it appears to the President that a question of law or fact has arisen, or is likely to arise, which is of such a nature and of such public importance that it is expedient to obtain the opinion of the Supreme Court upon it, he may refer the question to that Court for consideration and the Court may, after such hearing as it thinks fit, report to the President its opinion thereon.
(2) The President may, notwithstanding anything in the proviso to article 131, refer a dispute of the kind mentioned in the said proviso to the Supreme Court for opinion and the Supreme Court shall, after hearing as it thinks fit, report to the President its opinion thereon.

Article 144: Civil and judicial authorities to act in aid of the Supreme Court
All authorities, civil and judicial, in the territory of India shall act in aid of the Supreme Court.

Article 145: Rules of Court, etc.
(1) Subject to the provisions of any law made by Parliament, the Supreme Court may from time to time, with the approval of the President, make rules for regulating generally the practice and procedure of the Court including—
(a) the procedure for hearing appeals and other matters pertaining to the jurisdiction of the Court;
(b) the fees payable in respect of proceedings in the Court; and
(c) the granting of any certificate required by any law as a condition precedent to the presentation of an appeal to the Court or the obtaining of any order or other process for enforcing the rights conferred by any such law.
(2) Subject to the provisions of clause (3), rules made under this article may fix the minimum number of Judges who are to sit for any purpose, and may provide for the powers of single Judges and Division Courts.

Article 146: Officers and servants and the expenses of the Supreme Court
(1) Appointments of officers and servants of the Supreme Court shall be made by the Chief Justice of India or such other Judge or officer of the Court as he may direct.
(2) Subject to the provisions of any law made by Parliament, the conditions of service of officers and servants of the Supreme Court shall be such as may be prescribed by rules made by the Chief Justice of India or by some other Judge or officer of the Court authorized by the Chief Justice of India to make rules for the purpose.
(3) The administrative expenses of the Supreme Court, including all salaries, allowances and pensions payable to or in respect of the officers and servants of the Court, shall be charged upon the Consolidated Fund of India, and any fees or other moneys taken by the Court shall form part of that Fund.

Article 147: Special provisions as to financial Bills
(1) A Bill or amendment making provision for any of the matters specified in sub-clauses (a) to (f) of clause (1) of article 110 shall not be introduced or moved except on the recommendation of the President and a Bill making such provision shall not be introduced in the Council of States: Provided that no recommendation shall be required under this clause for the moving of an amendment making provision for the reduction or abolition of any tax.
(2) A Bill or amendment shall not be deemed to make provision for any of the matters aforesaid by reason only that it provides for the imposition of fines or other pecuniary penalties, or for the demand or payment of fees for licences or fees for services rendered, or by reason that it provides for the imposition, abolition, remission, alteration or regulation of any tax by any local authority or body for local purposes.
(3) A Money Bill shall not be introduced in the Council of States.
(4) After a Money Bill has been passed by the House of the People it shall be transmitted to the Council of States for its recommendations and the Council of States shall within a period of fourteen days from the date of its receipt of the Bill return the Bill to the House of the People with its recommendations and the House of the People may thereupon either accept or reject all or any of the recommendations of the Council of States.

Article 148: Comptroller and Auditor-General of India
(1) There shall be a Comptroller and Auditor-General of India who shall be appointed by the President by warrant under his hand and seal and shall only be removed from office in like manner and on the like grounds as a Judge of the Supreme Court.
(2) Every person appointed to be the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India shall, before he enters upon his office, make and subscribe before the President, or some person appointed in that behalf by him, an oath or affirmation according to the form set out for the purpose in the Third Schedule.
(3) The salary and other conditions of service of the Comptroller and Auditor-General shall be such as may be determined by Parliament by law and, until they are so determined, shall be as specified in the Second Schedule, and the salary and allowances of the Comptroller and Auditor-General shall not be diminished during his term of office.

Article 149: Duties and Powers of the Comptroller and Auditor-General
(1) The Comptroller and Auditor-General shall perform such duties and exercise such powers in relation to the accounts of the Union and of the States and of any other authority or body as may be prescribed by or under any law made by Parliament and, until provision in that behalf is so made, shall perform such duties and exercise such powers in relation to the accounts of the Union and of the States as were conferred on or exercisable by the Auditor-General of India immediately before the commencement of this Constitution in relation to the accounts of the Dominion of India and of the Provinces respectively.
(2) The reports of the Comptroller and Auditor-General relating to the accounts of the Union shall be submitted to the President, who shall cause them to be laid before each House of Parliament.
(3) The reports of the Comptroller and Auditor-General relating to the accounts of a State shall be submitted to the Governor of the State, who shall cause them to be laid before the Legislature of the State.

Article 150: Audit reports
(1) The accounts of the Union and of the States shall be kept in such form as the President may, on the advice of the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India, prescribe.
(2) The accounts of the Union and of the States relating to the expenditure and receipts shall be audited and reported on by the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India who shall, for that purpose, have the same powers as the Auditor-General of India has in relation to the audit of the Government accounts, and the reports of the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India relating to the accounts of the Union shall be submitted to the President, who shall cause them to be laid before each House of Parliament.

Article 151: Audit reports of the Comptroller and Auditor-General
(1) The reports of the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India relating to the accounts of the States shall be submitted to the Governor of the State, who shall cause them to be laid before the Legislature of the State.
(2) The reports of the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India relating to the accounts of any Union territory having a Legislative Assembly shall be submitted to the Lieutenant Governor of the Union territory, who shall cause them to be laid before that Legislative Assembly.
(3) The reports referred to in clauses (1) and (2) shall also be submitted to the President.

Article 152: The Attorney-General for India
(1) The President shall appoint a person who is qualified to be appointed a Judge of the Supreme Court to be Attorney-General for India.
(2) It shall be the duty of the Attorney-General to give advice to the Government of India upon such legal matters, and to perform such other duties of a legal character, as may from time to time be referred or assigned to him by the President, and to discharge the functions conferred on him by or under this Constitution or any other law for the time being in force.
(3) In the performance of his duties, the Attorney-General shall have right of audience in all courts in the territory of India.
(4) The Attorney-General shall hold office during the pleasure of the President, and shall receive such remuneration as the President may determine.

Article 153: Governors of States
(1) There shall be a Governor for each State.
(2) No person shall be eligible for appointment as Governor unless he is a citizen of India and has completed the age of thirty-five years.
(3) The Governor of a State shall be appointed by the President by warrant under his hand and seal.
(4) The Governor shall hold office during the pleasure of the President.
(5) The Governor may, by writing under his hand addressed to the President, resign his office.
(6) Subject to the foregoing provisions of this article, the Governor shall have the same powers and functions as are vested in the President under this Constitution and under any law made by Parliament.
(7) The Governor shall not be a member of either House of Parliament or of a House of the Legislature of any State specified in the First Schedule, and if a member of either House of Parliament or of a House of the Legislature of any such State be appointed Governor, he shall be deemed to have vacated his seat in that House on the date on which he enters upon his office as Governor.

Article 154: Executive Power of State
(1) The executive power of the State shall be vested in the Governor and shall be exercised by him either directly or through officers subordinate to him in accordance with this Constitution.
(2) Nothing in this article shall—
(a) be deemed to transfer to the Governor any functions conferred by any existing law on any other authority; or
(b) prevent Parliament or the Legislature of the State from conferring by law functions on any authority subordinate to the Governor.
(3) The executive power of the State extends to the matters with respect to which the Legislature of the State has power to make laws.
(4) Nothing in this article shall derogate from the provisions of article 162.

Article 155: Appointment of Governor
(1) The Governor of a State shall be appointed by the President by warrant under his hand and seal.
(2) The Governor shall hold office during the pleasure of the President.
(3) The Governor may, by writing under his hand addressed to the President, resign his office.
(4) Subject to the foregoing provisions of this article, a Governor shall not be eligible for any further office under the Government of India or the Government of any other State.

Article 156: Term of office of Governor
(1) The Governor shall hold office during the pleasure of the President.
(2) The Governor may, by writing under his hand addressed to the President, resign his office.
(3) Subject to the foregoing provisions of this article, a Governor shall hold office for a term of five years from the date on which he enters upon his office:
Provided that a Governor shall, notwithstanding the expiration of his term, continue to hold office until his successor enters upon his office.

Article 157: Qualifications for appointment as Governor
(1) No person shall be eligible for appointment as Governor unless he is a citizen of India and has completed the age of thirty-five years.
(2) A person shall not be eligible for appointment as Governor of more than two States.

Article 158: Speaker and Deputy Speaker of the House of the People
(1) The House of the People shall, as soon as may be, choose two members of the House to be respectively Speaker and Deputy Speaker thereof and, so often as the office of Speaker or Deputy Speaker becomes vacant, the House shall choose another member to be Speaker or Deputy Speaker, as the case may be.
(2) The Speaker or the Deputy Speaker shall vacate his office if he ceases to be a member of the House of the People otherwise than by reason of the dissolution of the House.
(3) If the office of Speaker or Deputy Speaker is vacant, the duties of the office shall be performed by such member of the House of the People as the President may appoint for the purpose.

Article 159: Oath or affirmation by the Governor
Every Governor and every person discharging the functions of the Governor shall, before entering upon his office, make and subscribe in the presence of the Chief Justice of the High Court exercising jurisdiction in relation to the State, or, in his absence, the senior-most Judge of that Court available, an oath or affirmation in the following form, that is to say—
"I, A.B., do swear in the name of God/solemnly affirm that I will faithfully execute the office of Governor (or discharge the functions of the Governor) of [name of the State] and will to the best of my ability preserve, protect and defend the Constitution and the law and that I will devote myself to the service and well-being of the people of [name of the State]."

Article 160: Oath or affirmation by Governors
Every Governor and every person discharging the functions of the Governor shall, before entering upon his office, make and subscribe in the presence of the Chief Justice of the High Court exercising jurisdiction in relation to the State, or, in his absence, the seniormost Judge of that Court available, an oath or affirmation in the following form, that is to say—
“I, A.B., do swear in the name of God (or solemnly affirm) that I will faithfully execute the office of Governor (or discharge the functions of the Governor) of (name of the State) and will to the best of my ability preserve, protect and defend the Constitution and the law and that I will devote myself to the service and well-being of the people of (name of the State).”

Article 161: Power of Governor to grant pardons, etc. and to suspend, remit or commute sentences in certain cases
The Governor of a State shall have the power to grant pardons, reprieves, respites or remissions of punishment or to suspend, remit or commute the sentence of any person convicted of any offence against any law relating to a matter to which the executive power of the State extends.

Article 162: Extent of executive power of State
Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, the executive power of a State shall extend to the matters with respect to which the Legislature of the State has power to make laws:
Provided that in any matter with respect to which the Legislature of a State and Parliament have power to make laws, the executive power of the State shall be subject to, and limited by, the executive power expressly conferred by this Constitution or by any law made by Parliament upon the Union or authorities thereof.

Article 163: Council of Ministers to aid and advise Governor
(1) There shall be a Council of Ministers with the Chief Minister at the head to aid and advise the Governor in the exercise of his functions, except in so far as he is by or under this Constitution required to exercise his functions or any of them in his discretion.
(2) If any question arises whether any matter is or is not a matter as respects which the Governor is by or under this Constitution required to act in his discretion, the decision of the Governor in his discretion shall be final, and the validity of anything done by the Governor shall not be called in question on the ground that he ought or ought not to have acted in his discretion.

Article 164: Other provisions as to Ministers
(1) The Chief Minister shall be appointed by the Governor and the other Ministers shall be appointed by the Governor on the advice of the Chief Minister, and the Ministers shall hold office during the pleasure of the Governor.
(2) The Council of Ministers shall be collectively responsible to the Legislative Assembly of the State.
(3) Before a Minister enters upon his office, the Governor shall administer to him the oaths of office and of secrecy according to the forms set out for the purpose in the Third Schedule.
(4) A Minister who for any period of six consecutive months is not a member of the Legislature of the State shall at the expiration of that period cease to be a Minister.
(5) The salaries and allowances of Ministers shall be such as the Legislature of the State may from time to time by law determine and, until the Legislature of the State so determines, shall be as specified in the Second Schedule.

Article 165: Advocate General for the State
(1) The Governor of each State shall appoint a person who is qualified to be appointed a Judge of a High Court to be Advocate General for the State.
(2) It shall be the duty of the Advocate General to give advice to the Government of the State upon such legal matters, and to perform such other duties of a legal character, as may from time to time be referred or assigned to him by the Governor, and to discharge the functions conferred on him by or under this Constitution or any other law for the time being in force.
(3) The Advocate General shall hold office during the pleasure of the Governor, and shall receive such remuneration as the Governor may determine.
(4) The Advocate General shall have the right to speak and take part in the proceedings of any committee of the Legislature of which he may be named a member, but shall not be entitled to a vote.

Article 166: Conduct of business of the Government of a State
(1) All executive action of the Government of a State shall be expressed to be taken in the name of the Governor.
(2) Orders and other instruments made and executed in the name of the Governor shall be authenticated in such manner as may be specified in rules to be made by the Governor, and the validity of an order or instrument which is so authenticated shall not be called in question on the ground that it is not an order or instrument made or executed by the Governor.
(3) The Governor shall make rules for the more convenient transaction of the business of the Government of the State, and for the allocation among Ministers of the said business insofar as it is not business with respect to which the Chief Minister is required to transact business in consultation with the Governor.

Article 167: Duties of Chief Minister as respects the furnishing of information to Governor, etc.
It shall be the duty of the Chief Minister of each State—
(a) to communicate to the Governor of the State all decisions of the Council of Ministers relating to the administration of the affairs of the State and proposals for legislation;
(b) to furnish such information relating to the administration of the affairs of the State and proposals for legislation as the Governor may call for; and
(c) if the Governor so requires, to submit for the consideration of the Council of Ministers any matter on which a decision has been taken by a Minister but which has not been considered by the Council.

Article 168: Constitution of Legislatures in States
(1) For every State, there shall be a Legislature which consists of the Governor and two Houses, namely, the Legislative Assembly and the Legislative Council, if such a Council is created for the State.
(2) The Legislative Assembly of the State shall consist of members chosen by direct election from territorial constituencies in the State.
(3) The Legislative Council of a State having such a Council shall consist of members chosen in the following manner:
(a) one-third shall be elected by electorates consisting of members of municipalities, district boards and other local authorities in the State specified by law;
(b) one-third shall be elected by electorates consisting of the members of the Legislative Assembly of the State;
(c) one-twelfth shall be elected by electorates consisting of persons residing in the State who have been for at least three years graduates of any university in the territory of India or have been for at least three years in possession of qualifications prescribed by or under any law made by Parliament as equivalent to that of a graduate of any such university;
(d) one-twelfth shall be elected by electorates consisting of persons who have been for at least three years engaged in teaching in such educational institutions within the State, not lower in standard than that of a secondary school, as may be prescribed by or under any law made by Parliament;
(e) one-sixth shall be nominated by the Governor from among persons having special knowledge or practical experience in respect of such matters as the following, namely: literature, science, art, cooperative movement and social service.

Article 169: Abolition or creation of Legislative Councils in States
(1) Notwithstanding anything in article 168, Parliament may by law provide for the abolition of the Legislative Council of a State having such a Council or for the creation of such a Council in a State having no such Council if the Legislative Assembly of the State passes a resolution to that effect by a majority of the total membership of the Assembly and by a majority of not less than two-thirds of the members of the Assembly present and voting.
(2) Any law referred to in clause (1) shall contain such provisions for the amendment of this Constitution as may be necessary to give effect to the provisions of the law and may also contain such supplemental, incidental and consequential provisions (including provisions as to representation in Parliament and in the Legislature or Legislatures of the State or States affected by such law) as Parliament may deem necessary.

Article 170: Composition of Legislative Assemblies
(1) The total number of seats in the Legislative Assembly of every State, except the State of Jammu and Kashmir, shall be allotted to the various territorial constituencies in such manner that the ratio between the population of each constituency and the number of seats allotted to it is, so far as practicable, the same throughout the State.
(2) In the case of a Union territory having a Legislative Assembly, the total number of seats in the Assembly shall be determined by Parliament by law and, until so determined, shall not be less than thirty.
(3) In this article, the expression "population" means the population as ascertained at the last preceding census of which the relevant figures have been published:
Provided that the reference in this clause to the last preceding census of which the relevant figures have been published shall, until the relevant figures for the first census taken after the year 2026 have been published, be construed as a reference to the 2001 census.

Article 171: Composition of the Legislative Councils
(1) Subject to the provisions of article 333, the Legislative Council of a State shall consist of members elected by the electorates consisting of members of municipalities, district boards and such other local authorities in the State as Parliament may by law specify.
(2) The members of the Legislative Council of a State having such a Council shall be chosen in the following manner:
(a) one-third shall be elected by electorates consisting of members of municipalities in the State;
(b) one-twelfth shall be elected by electorates consisting of members of district boards in the State;
(c) one-twelfth shall be elected by electorates consisting of persons residing in the State who have been for at least three years graduates of any university in the territory of India or have been for at least three years in possession of qualifications prescribed by or under any law made by Parliament as equivalent to that of a graduate of any such university;
(d) one-third shall be elected by the members of the Legislative Assembly of the State from amongst persons who are not members of the Assembly; and
(e) the remainder shall be nominated by the Governor in accordance with the provisions of clause (3).

Article 172: Duration of State Legislatures
(1) Every Legislative Assembly of every State, unless sooner dissolved, shall continue for five years from the date appointed for its first meeting and no longer.
(2) The Governor shall from time to time summon the House or each House of the Legislature of the State to meet at such time and place as he thinks fit, but six months shall not intervene between its last sitting in one session and the date appointed for its first sitting in the next session.
(3) The Governor may, from time to time, prorogue the House or either House and dissolve the Legislative Assembly.
(4) The Governor shall not, without the previous sanction of the President, dissolve the Legislative Assembly unless—
(a) a resolution for the dissolution of the Assembly has been passed by the Legislative Assembly and agreed to by the Council of States; or
(b) a period of six months has elapsed from the date of the passing of a resolution by the Legislative Assembly calling upon the Governor to dissolve the Assembly.

Article 173: Qualifications for membership of the State Legislature
(1) A person shall not be qualified to be chosen to fill a seat in the Legislature of a State unless he—
(a) is a citizen of India, and makes and subscribes before some person authorized in that behalf by the Election Commission an oath or affirmation according to the form set out for the purpose in the Third Schedule;
(b) is, in the case of a seat in the Legislative Assembly, not less than twenty-five years of age and, in the case of a seat in the Legislative Council, not less than thirty years of age; and
(c) possesses such other qualifications as may be prescribed in that behalf by or under any law made by Parliament.
(2) If any question arises as to whether a member of a House of the Legislature of a State has become subject to any of the disqualifications mentioned in clause (1), the question shall be referred for the decision of the Governor and his decision shall be final.

Article 174: Sessions of State Legislatures
(1) The Governor shall from time to time summon the House or each House of the Legislature of the State to meet at such time and place as he thinks fit, but six months shall not intervene between its last sitting in one session and the date appointed for its first sitting in the next session.
(2) The Governor may from time to time—
(a) prorogue the House or either House;
(b) dissolve the Legislative Assembly.
(3) The Governor shall address the Legislative Assembly or, in the case of a State having a Legislative Council, both Houses assembled together, at the commencement of the first session after each general election to the Legislative Assembly and at the commencement of the first session of each year and inform the Legislature of the causes of its summons.

Article 175: Sessions of the State Legislature, prorogation and dissolution
(1) The Governor shall from time to time summon the House or each House of the Legislature of the State to meet at such time and place as he thinks fit, but six months shall not intervene between its last sitting in one session and the date appointed for its first sitting in the next session.
(2) The Governor may from time to time—
(a) prorogue the House or either House;
(b) dissolve the Legislative Assembly.
(3) The Governor shall in summoning the House or each House of the Legislature of the State to meet, and in proroguing the House or either House, act in accordance with the advice of the Chief Minister, or, as the case may be, the Council of Ministers, of the State.
(4) Unless sooner dissolved, the Legislative Assembly shall continue for five years from the date appointed for its first meeting and no longer, and the expiration of the said period of five years shall operate as a dissolution of the Assembly.

Article 176: Special Address by the Governor
(1) At the commencement of the first session after each general election to the Legislative Assembly and at the commencement of the first session of each year, the Governor shall address the Legislative Assembly or, in the case of a State having a Legislative Council, both Houses assembled together and inform the Legislature of the causes of its summons.
(2) Provision shall be made by the rules regulating the procedure of the House or either House for the allotment of time for discussion of the matters referred to in such address.

Article 177: Rights of Ministers and Advocate-General as respects the Houses
(1) Every Minister and the Advocate-General for a State shall have the right to speak in, and otherwise to take part in the proceedings of, the Legislative Assembly of the State or, in the case of a State having a Legislative Council, both Houses, and to speak in, and otherwise to take part in the proceedings of, any committee of the Legislature of which he may be named a member, but shall not by virtue of this article be entitled to vote.
(2) The Governor of a State shall have the right to address and send messages to, either House of the Legislature of the State, whether with respect to a Bill then pending in the Legislature or otherwise, and for that purpose the House shall have the right to address the Governor and send messages to him.

Article 178: Quorum
(1) Unless the Legislative Assembly of the State by law otherwise provides, the quorum to constitute a meeting of the Assembly shall be one-tenth of the total number of members of the Assembly.
(2) If at any time during a meeting of the Assembly there is no quorum, it shall be the duty of the Speaker or the person acting as Speaker, or in case of a Legislative Council, the Chairman or the person acting as Chairman, either to adjourn the Assembly or to suspend the meeting until there is a quorum.

Article 179: Vacation and resignation of, and removal from, the offices of Speaker and Deputy Speaker
(1) The Speaker or the Deputy Speaker of the Legislative Assembly of a State may resign his office by writing under his hand addressed to the Speaker, or, if there is no Speaker or he is absent from the State, to the Deputy Speaker thereof.
(2) A member holding office as Speaker or Deputy Speaker of the Legislative Assembly of a State—
(a) shall vacate his office if he ceases to be a member of the Assembly except in case of temporary absence of less than forty days;
(b) may at any time by writing under his hand addressed to the Governor, resign his office; and
(c) may be removed from his office by a resolution of the Assembly passed by a majority of all the then members of the Assembly:
Provided that no resolution for the purpose of clause (c) shall be moved unless at least fourteen days' notice has been given of the intention to move the resolution:
Provided further that, whenever the Legislative Assembly of a State having a Legislative Council has adopted a resolution which has been agreed to by the Council resolving that the Speaker or the Deputy Speaker of the Legislative Assembly of the State be removed from his office, the Governor shall order the removal of the Speaker or, as the case may be, the Deputy Speaker from office.

Article 180: Assumption of office by the Chief Minister
(1) The Chief Minister shall be appointed by the Governor and the other Ministers shall be appointed by the Governor on the advice of the Chief Minister, and the Ministers shall hold office during the pleasure of the Governor.
(2) The Council of Ministers shall be collectively responsible to the Legislative Assembly of the State.
(3) Before a Minister enters upon his office, the Governor shall administer to him the oaths of office and of secrecy according to the forms set out for the purpose in the Third Schedule.
(4) A Minister who for any period of six consecutive months is not a member of the Legislature of the State shall at the expiration of that period cease to be a Minister.

Article 181: Constitution of Legislatures in States
(1) The Legislature of each State shall consist of the Governor, and—
(a) in the States of Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Maharashtra, Karnataka and Uttar Pradesh, two Houses;
(b) in other States, one House.
(2) Where there are two Houses of the Legislature of a State, one shall be known as the Legislative Council and the other as the Legislative Assembly, and where there is only one House, it shall be known as the Legislative Assembly.

Article 182: Power of Governor to promulgate Ordinances during recess of Legislature
(1) If at any time, except when the Legislative Assembly of a State is in session, or where there is a Legislative Council in a State, except when both Houses of the Legislature are in session, the Governor is satisfied that circumstances exist which render it necessary for him to take immediate action, he may promulgate such Ordinance as the circumstances appear to him to require:
Provided that the Governor shall not, without instructions from the President, promulgate any such Ordinance if—
(a) a Bill containing the same provisions would under this Constitution have required the previous sanction of the President for the introduction thereof into the Legislature; or
(b) he would have deemed it necessary to reserve a Bill containing the same provisions for the consideration of the President; or
(c) an Act of the Legislature of the State containing the same provisions would under this Constitution have been invalid unless, having been reserved for the consideration of the President, it had received the assent of the President.
(2) An Ordinance promulgated under this article shall have the same force and effect as an Act of the Legislature of the State assented to by the Governor, but every such Ordinance—
(a) shall be laid before the Legislative Assembly of the State, or, where there is a Legislative Council in the State, before both the Houses, and shall cease to operate at the expiration of six weeks from the reassembly of the Legislature, or,
in case of a State having a Legislative Council, of the Legislature of the State, unless sooner repealed or re-enacted by an Act of the Legislature; and
(b) may be withdrawn at any time by the Governor.

Article 183: Power of Governor to promulgate Ordinances during recess of Legislature
(1) If at any time, except when the Legislative Assembly of a State is in session, or where there is a Legislative Council in a State, except when both Houses are in session, the Governor is satisfied that circumstances exist which render it necessary for him to take immediate action, he may promulgate such Ordinance as the circumstances appear to him to require:
Provided that the Governor shall not, without instructions from the President, promulgate any such Ordinance if—
(a) a Bill containing the same provisions would under this Constitution have required the previous sanction of the President for the introduction thereof into the Legislature; or
(b) he would have deemed it necessary to reserve a Bill containing the same provisions for the consideration of the President; or
(c) an Act of the Legislature of the State containing the same provisions would under this Constitution have been invalid unless, having been reserved for the consideration of the President, it had received the assent of the President.
(2) An Ordinance promulgated under this article shall have the same force and effect as an Act of the Legislature of the State assented to by the Governor, but every such Ordinance—
(a) shall be laid before the Legislative Assembly of the State, or, where there is a Legislative Council in the State, before both the Houses, and shall cease to operate at the expiration of six weeks from the reassembly of the Legislature, or if before the expiration of that period a resolution disapproving it is passed by the Legislative Assembly and agreed to by the Legislative Council, if any, upon the passing of the resolution or, as the case may be, on the resolution being agreed to by the Council; and
(b) may be withdrawn at any time by the Governor.

Article 184: Finality of judgments and orders of Supreme Court
(1) The Supreme Court in the exercise of its jurisdiction may pass such decree or make such order as is necessary for doing complete justice in any cause or matter pending before it, and any decree so passed or order so made shall be enforceable throughout the territory of India in such manner as may be prescribed by or under any law made by Parliament and, until provision in that behalf is so made, in such manner as the President may by order prescribe.
(2) Subject to the provisions of any law made by Parliament, the Supreme Court shall, to the exclusion of any other court, have jurisdiction to determine all questions relating to the infringement of the rights conferred by this Part.
(3) The minimum number of Judges who are to sit for the purpose of determining any question involving a substantial question of law as to the interpretation of this Constitution or for the purpose of hearing any reference under article 143 shall be five:
Provided that where the Court hearing an appeal under any of the provisions of this Chapter other than article 132 consists of less than five Judges and in the course of such hearing any question as to the interpretation of this Constitution arises, such question shall be referred to a Court constituted as required by this clause for the purpose of hearing and deciding the question and shall be determined accordingly.

Article 185: The High Courts to be courts of record
The High Courts shall be courts of record and shall have all the powers of such a court including the power to punish for contempt of itself.

Article 186: Salaries, etc., of Judges
(1) There shall be charged on the Consolidated Fund of India—
(a) the salaries and allowances of the Judges of the Supreme Court;
(b) the pensions payable to or in respect of such Judges or the wives or other family members of such Judges;
(c) any grants, gratuities and sums payable to or in respect of such Judges or the wives or other family members of such Judges.
(2) The salaries, allowances, pensions and other conditions of service of the Judges of the Supreme Court shall not be varied to their disadvantage after their appointment except with their consent.
(3) If any question arises as to the age of a Judge of the Supreme Court, the question shall be decided by the President after consultation with the Chief Justice of India and the decision of the President shall be final.

Article 187: Procedure as to financial Bills
(1) A Bill or amendment making provision for any of the matters specified in sub-clauses (a) to (f) of clause (1) of article 110 shall not be introduced or moved except on the recommendation of the President and a Bill making such provision shall not be introduced in a State Legislature except on the recommendation of the Governor.
(2) A Bill or amendment shall not be deemed to make provision for any of the matters aforesaid by reason only that it provides for the imposition of fines or other pecuniary penalties, or for the demand or payment of fees for licences or fees for services rendered, or by reason that it provides for the imposition, abolition, remission, alteration or regulation of any tax by any local authority or body for local purposes.

Article 188: Power of the Speaker or Chairman in case of a tie
(1) At any sitting of the House of Parliament, if the votes are equal on any question, the Speaker or Chairman shall have and exercise a casting vote.
(2) The Speaker or Chairman shall not vote in the first instance but shall exercise a casting vote in the case of an equality of votes.

Article 189: Definition of 'Money Bill'
(1) For the purposes of this Chapter, a Bill shall be deemed to be a Money Bill if it contains only provisions dealing with all or any of the following matters, namely:
(a) the imposition, abolition, remission, alteration or regulation of any tax;
(b) the regulation of the borrowing of money or the giving of any guarantee by the Government of India, or the amendment of the law with respect to any financial obligations undertaken or to be undertaken by the Government of India;
(c) the custody of the Consolidated Fund or the Contingency Fund of India, the payment of moneys into or the withdrawal of moneys from any such Fund;
(d) the appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated Fund of India;
(e) the declaring of any expenditure to be expenditure charged on the Consolidated Fund of India or the increasing of the amount of any such expenditure;
(f) the receipt of money on account of the Consolidated Fund of India or the public account of India or the custody or issue of such money or the audit of the accounts of the Union or of a State; or
(g) any matter incidental to any of the matters specified in sub-clauses (a) to (f).
(2) A Bill shall not be deemed to be a Money Bill by reason only that it provides for the imposition of fines or other pecuniary penalties, or for the demand or payment of fees for licences or fees for services rendered, or by reason that it provides for the imposition, abolition, remission, alteration or regulation of any tax by any local authority or body for local purposes.

Article 190: Vacation of seats
(1) If a member of a House of Parliament—
(a) becomes subject to any of the disqualifications mentioned in clause (1) of article 102, or
(b) resigns his seat by writing under his hand addressed to the Chairman or the Speaker, as the case may be, and his resignation is accepted by the Chairman or the Speaker, as the case may be,
his seat shall thereupon become vacant.
(2) When a member of a House of Parliament has been absent from all meetings thereof for a period of sixty days then he shall also be subject to the disqualification for being a member of that House under clause (1) of article 102.

Article 191: Disqualifications for membership
(1) A person shall be disqualified for being chosen as, and for being, a member of either House of Parliament—
(a) if he holds any office of profit under the Government of India or the Government of any State, other than an office declared by Parliament by law not to disqualify its holder;
(b) if he is of unsound mind and stands so declared by a competent court;
(c) if he is an undischarged insolvent;
(d) if he is not a citizen of India, or has voluntarily acquired the citizenship of a foreign State, or is under any acknowledgement of allegiance or adherence to a foreign State;
(e) if he is so disqualified by or under any law made by Parliament.
(2) A person shall be disqualified for being a member of either House of Parliament if he is so disqualified under the Tenth Schedule.

Article 192: Vacation of seats on conviction for certain offences
(1) If a person—
(a) is, for being a recipient of any loan or assistance from the State Bank of India or any of its subsidiary banks or any corresponding new bank as defined in section 2 of the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1970 (5 of 1970), declared by a competent court to be of unsound mind; or
(b) is, for being a director or manager of any corporation or other company which has not made prescribed returns to the Registrar of Companies for two financial years immediately preceding the financial year during which his election is sought to be questioned and which has been adjudged insolvent,
is convicted by a court of any offence and sentenced to imprisonment for not less than two years, he shall be disqualified for a period of six years from the date of such conviction and shall not be eligible to participate in any election.

Article 193: Penalty for sitting and voting before making oath or affirmation
If a person sits or votes as a member of either House of Parliament before he has complied with the requirements of article 99 or under false pretences, he shall be liable in respect of each day on which he so sits or votes to a penalty of five hundred rupees to be recovered as a debt due to the Union.

Article 194: Powers, privileges, etc., of the House of Legislatures and of the members and committees thereof
(1) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution and to the rules and standing orders regulating the procedure of the Legislature, there shall be freedom of speech in the Legislature of every State.
(2) No member of the Legislature of a State shall be liable to any proceedings in any court in respect of anything said or any vote given by him in the Legislature or any committee thereof, and no person shall be so liable in respect of the publication by or under the authority of a House of such a Legislature of any report, paper, votes or proceedings.
(3) In other respects, the powers, privileges and immunities of a House of the Legislature of a State, and of the members and the committees of a House of such Legislature, shall be such as may from time to time be defined by the Legislature by law, and until so defined, shall be those of that House and of its members and committees immediately before the coming into force of Section 26 of the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978.

Article 195: Salaries and allowances of members
(1) Members of the Legislature of a State shall be entitled to receive such salaries and allowances as may from time to time be determined by the Legislature by law and, until provision in that behalf is so made, salaries and allowances at such rates and upon such conditions as were immediately before the coming into force of Section 7 of the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, applicable in the case of members of the Legislative Assembly of the corresponding Province.
(2) The provisions of clauses (3), (4) and (5) of Article 112 shall, so far as may be, apply in relation to the Legislature of a State as they apply in relation to Parliament.

Article 196: Secret ballot
(1) No member of either House of Parliament shall disclose to any person before the Speaker has reported to the House the result of the voting on any matter the nature of his vote on such matter.
(2) If any member contravenes the provisions of clause (1), he shall be disqualified for being a member of that House.

Article 197: Decision on questions as to disqualifications of members
(1) All doubts and disputes arising out of or in connection with the decision of the President under article 103, or under clause (1) of article 192, shall be inquired into and decided by the Supreme Court whose decision shall be final.
(2) Before giving any decision on any such question, the Supreme Court shall hold such inquiry as it deems necessary.

Article 198: Special provisions as to financial Bills
(1) A Bill or amendment making provision for any of the matters specified in sub-clauses (a) to (f) of clause (1) of Article 199 shall not be introduced or moved except on the recommendation of the Governor of the State.
(2) A Bill which, if enacted and brought into operation, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of a State shall not be passed by the Legislature of the State unless the Governor has recommended to that Legislature the consideration of the Bill.
(3) A Bill which, if enacted and brought into operation, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of the State, shall not be so enacted by the Legislature of the State as to necessitate the introduction of a Money Bill in the legislature of the State.

Article 199: Definition of 'Money Bill'
(1) For the purposes of this Chapter, a Bill shall be deemed to be a Money Bill if it contains only provisions dealing with all or any of the following matters, namely:
(a) the imposition, abolition, remission, alteration or regulation of any tax;
(b) the regulation of the borrowing of money or the giving of any guarantee by the Government of India, or the amendment of the law with respect to any financial obligations undertaken or to be undertaken by the Government of India;
(c) the custody of the Consolidated Fund or the Contingency Fund of India, the payment of moneys into or the withdrawal of moneys from any such fund;
(d) the appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated Fund of India;
(e) the declaring of any expenditure to be expenditure charged on the Consolidated Fund of India or the increasing of the amount of any such expenditure;
(f) the receipt of money on account of the Consolidated Fund of India or the public account of India or the custody or issue of such money or the audit of the accounts of the Union or of a State;
(g) any matter incidental to any of the matters specified in sub-clauses (a) to (f).
(2) A Bill shall not be deemed to be a Money Bill by reason only that it provides for the imposition of fines or other pecuniary penalties, or for the demand or payment of fees for licenses or fees for services rendered, or by reason that it provides for the imposition, abolition, remission, alteration or regulation of any tax by any local authority or body for local purposes.

Article 200: Assent to Bills
(1) When a Bill has been passed by the Legislative Assembly of a State or, in the case of a State having a Legislative Council, has been passed by both Houses of the Legislature of the State, it shall be presented to the Governor and the Governor shall declare either that he assents to the Bill or that he withholds assent therefrom or that he reserves the Bill for the consideration of the President:
Provided that the Governor may, as soon as possible after the presentation of the Bill to him for assent, return the Bill if it is not a Money Bill together with a message requesting that the House or Houses will reconsider the Bill or any specified provisions thereof and, in particular, will consider the desirability of introducing any such amendments as he may recommend in his message and, when a Bill is so returned, the House or Houses shall reconsider the Bill accordingly, and if the Bill is passed again by the House or Houses with or without amendment and presented to the Governor for assent, the Governor shall not withhold assent therefrom:
Provided further that the Governor shall not assent to, but shall reserve for the consideration of the President, any Bill which in the opinion of the Governor would, if it became law, so derogate from the powers of the High Court as to endanger the position which that Court is by this Constitution designed to fill.
(2) A Bill reserved for the consideration of the President shall not become law unless the President has declared his assent thereto.

Article 201: Procedure in Financial Matters
(1) No Bill or amendment making provision for any of the matters specified in sub-clauses (a) to (g) of clause (1) of article 110 shall be introduced or moved in either House of Parliament except on the recommendation of the President.
(2) No Bill or amendment shall be introduced or moved in either House of Parliament if it imposes or varies a tax or duty on goods exported from India or intended to be imported into India, except on the recommendation of the President and unless such Bill or amendment has been considered by the Goods and Services Tax Council.
(3) A Bill which, if enacted and brought into operation, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India shall not be passed by either House of Parliament unless the President has recommended to that House the consideration of the Bill.

Article 202: Power of President to authorise expenditure in advance
(1) The President may, with the consent of the Parliament, authorise expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India, pending the completion of the procedure prescribed in Article 114 for the appropriation of moneys out of that Fund.
(2) No such expenditure shall be incurred for a period exceeding four months without the sanction of Parliament.

Article 203: Power of President to authorise expenditure in advance
(1) The President may, with the consent of the Parliament, authorise expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India, pending the completion of the procedure prescribed in Article 114 for the appropriation of moneys out of that Fund.
(2) No such expenditure shall be incurred for a period exceeding four months without the sanction of Parliament.

Article 204: Power of President to authorise expenditure in advance
(1) The President may, with the consent of the Parliament, authorise expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India, pending the completion of the procedure prescribed in Article 114 for the appropriation of moneys out of that Fund.
(2) No such expenditure shall be incurred for a period exceeding four months without the sanction of Parliament.

Article 205: Supplementary, additional or excess grants
(1) The President shall have power to authorise the withdrawal of moneys from the Consolidated Fund of India for the purpose of meeting any unexpected expenditure which, in his opinion, is necessary to meet an emergency.
(2) The President shall, as soon as possible after the withdrawal of any moneys under this article, cause to be laid before Parliament a statement of the amount so withdrawn and the reasons for the withdrawal.

Article 206: Power of President to authorise expenditure in advance
(1) The President may, with the consent of the Parliament, authorise expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India, pending the completion of the procedure prescribed in Article 114 for the appropriation of moneys out of that Fund.
(2) No such expenditure shall be incurred for a period exceeding four months without the sanction of Parliament.

Article 207: Power to make advances out of the Consolidated Fund of India
(1) The President may, with the consent of the Parliament, make advances out of the Consolidated Fund of India to meet any unforeseen expenditure, pending the appropriation thereof by Parliament.
(2) No such advance shall be made except on the recommendation of the Finance Minister.

Article 208: Power of President to authorise expenditure in advance
(1) The President may, with the consent of the Parliament, authorise expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India, pending the completion of the procedure prescribed in Article 114 for the appropriation of moneys out of that Fund.
(2) No such expenditure shall be incurred for a period exceeding four months without the sanction of Parliament.

Article 209: Power of President to authorise expenditure in advance
(1) The President may, with the consent of the Parliament, authorise expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India, pending the completion of the procedure prescribed in Article 114 for the appropriation of moneys out of that Fund.
(2) No such expenditure shall be incurred for a period exceeding four months without the sanction of Parliament.

Article 210: Contingency Fund of India
(1) There shall be a Contingency Fund of India to be held by the President, out of which he may, with the consent of the Parliament, make advances to meet unforeseen expenditure pending the authorization of such expenditure by Parliament by law.
(2) The amount standing to the credit of the Contingency Fund of India shall not at any time exceed one-tenth of the estimated net revenue for the current financial year.

Article 211: Contingency Fund of India
(1) There shall be a Contingency Fund of India to be administered by the President.
(2) The President shall have power, out of the Contingency Fund of India, to meet any unforeseen expenditure which is not covered by the provisions of this Chapter, or by any other law for the time being in force, until the sanction of Parliament is obtained for such expenditure.
(3) The amount of the Contingency Fund of India shall be such as may be prescribed by Parliament.

Article 212: Power to make advances out of the Consolidated Fund of India
(1) The President shall have power to make advances out of the Consolidated Fund of India to meet any unforeseen expenditure, for a period not exceeding three months, pending the sanction of Parliament to a Supplementary or Additional Budget.
(2) No such advance shall be made except on the recommendation of the Council of Ministers.

Article 213: Charged Expenditure
(1) The expenditure charged on the Consolidated Fund of India shall be such expenditure as is specified in the statement referred to in Article 112.
(2) No other expenditure shall be charged on the Consolidated Fund of India except such as is provided for by an appropriation made by law.

Article 214: Supplementary, additional, and excess grants
(1) The President shall have power to authorise the withdrawal of moneys from the Consolidated Fund of India for the purpose of meeting any unforeseen expenditure, including expenditure which is in excess of the amount of moneys provided by the Appropriation Act.
(2) The amount so withdrawn shall be paid into the Consolidated Fund of India as soon as possible after the end of the financial year to which such expenditure relates.

Article 215: Power of President to authorise expenditure in case of emergency

Article 216: Power of President to authorise expenditure in excess of authorised appropriations
(1) If in any financial year, moneys are required to be spent for a purpose which is not included in the current year's Budget, or for a purpose for which no provision is made in the current year's Budget, or for a purpose for which the amount provided in the current year's Budget is insufficient, the President may, with the consent of the Parliament, authorise expenditure of such sums as may be necessary for the purpose.
(2) No such expenditure shall be incurred for a longer period than four months without the sanction of Parliament.

Article 217: Power of President to create new posts of Judges of Supreme Court and High Courts
(1) If at any time it appears to the President that the number of Judges of the Supreme Court is insufficient for the efficient discharge of the work of the Court, the President may by order increase the number of Judges by such number as he may deem fit, provided that the total number of Judges does not exceed one-third of the total number of members of the Union Public Service Commission. (2) If at any time it appears to the President that the number of Judges of a High Court is insufficient for the efficient discharge of the work of the Court, the President may by order increase the number of Judges by such number as he may deem fit, provided that the total number of Judges does not exceed the number of Judges specified in the First Schedule for the State. (3) Every order made under clause (1) or clause (2) shall be laid before each House of Parliament.

Article 218: Control over expenditure of moneys out of the Consolidated Fund of India
(1) The executive power of the Union extends to the spending of moneys out of the Consolidated Fund of India, and of the making of payments out of such Fund, for the purposes of the Union, and the decision as to the amount of any such payment shall be made by the President.
(2) No money shall be withdrawn from the Consolidated Fund of India except under appropriation made by law made by Parliament.

Article 219: Power of President to authorise expenditure in advance
(1) The President may, with the consent of the Parliament, authorise expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India, pending the completion of the procedure prescribed in Article 114 for the appropriation of moneys out of that Fund.
(2) No such expenditure shall be incurred for a period exceeding four months without the sanction of Parliament.

Article 220: Power of President to authorise expenditure in advance (1) The President may, with the consent of the Parliament, authorise expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India, pending the completion of the procedure prescribed in Article 114 for the appropriation of moneys out of that Fund. (2) No such expenditure shall be incurred for a period exceeding four months without the sanction of Parliament.

Article 221: Power of President to authorise expenditure in advance
(1) The President may, with the consent of the Parliament, authorise expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India, pending the completion of the procedure prescribed in Article 114 for the appropriation of moneys out of that Fund.
(2) No such expenditure shall be incurred for a period exceeding four months without the sanction of Parliament.

Article 222: Power of President to authorise expenditure in advance
(1) The President may, with the consent of the Parliament, authorise expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India, pending the completion of the procedure prescribed in Article 114 for the appropriation of moneys out of that Fund.
(2) No such expenditure shall be incurred for a period exceeding four months without the sanction of Parliament.

Article 223: Governor's Discretion to Pardon or Reprieve
(1) The Governor of a State shall have the power to grant pardons, reprieves, respites or remissions of punishment or to suspend, remit or commute the sentence of any person convicted of any offence against any law of the State.
(2) No sentence of death shall be executed without the previous consent of the Governor.

Article 224: Power of President to authorise expenditure in advance
(1) The President may, with the consent of the Parliament, authorise expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India, pending the completion of the procedure prescribed in Article 114 for the appropriation of moneys out of that Fund.
(2) No such expenditure shall be incurred for a period exceeding four months without the sanction of Parliament.

Article 225: Power of President to authorise expenditure in advance
(1) The President may, with the consent of the Parliament, authorise expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India, pending the completion of the procedure prescribed in Article 114 for the appropriation of moneys out of that Fund.
(2) No such expenditure shall be incurred for a period exceeding four months without the sanction of Parliament.

Article 226: Power of High Courts to issue writs
(1) The High Court may, in its discretion, issue to any person or authority, including in appropriate cases, any Government, whether central or state, directions, orders or writs, including writs in the nature of habeas corpus, mandamus, prohibition, quo warranto and certiorari, or any of them, for the enforcement of any of the rights conferred by Part III and for any other purpose.
(2) The power conferred by clause (1) shall not be in derogation of the power conferred on the High Court by any other provision of this Constitution.

Article 227: Power of High Court to superintendence of all Courts subordinate to it
(1) Every High Court shall have superintendence over all courts subordinate to it throughout the territories in relation to which it exercises jurisdiction.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provision, the High Court may, with respect to any matter which is within the jurisdiction of a subordinate court,—
(a) call for returns from such court;
(b) make or issue general rules and orders, and prescribe forms for regulating the practice and procedure of such court;
(c) prescribe the powers to be exercised by such court in regard to the following matters, namely:—
(i) the summoning and enforcing the attendance of persons and the production of documents;
(ii) the issue of commissions for the examination of witnesses or documents;
(iii) the disposal of cases by compromise or otherwise;
(iv) the execution of sentences and orders;
(d) exercise such other powers as may be necessary to ensure that the subordinate courts are properly administered.

Article 228: Power of State Legislature to authorise expenditure in advance
(1) The Governor of a State may, with the consent of the State Legislature, authorise expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of the State, pending the completion of the procedure prescribed in Article 204 for the appropriation of moneys out of that Fund. (2) No such expenditure shall be incurred for a period exceeding four months without the sanction of the State Legislature.

Article 229: Power of President to authorise expenditure in advance
(1) The President may, with the consent of the Parliament, authorise expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India, pending the completion of the procedure prescribed in Article 114 for the appropriation of moneys out of that Fund.
(2) No such expenditure shall be incurred for a period exceeding four months without the sanction of Parliament.

Article 230: Restriction on publication of certain proceedings of Parliament
(1) Subject to the provisions of this article, no publication of the reports, debates or proceedings of either House of Parliament shall be made without the previous sanction of the House concerned.
(2) Nothing in clause (1) shall apply to the publication of—
(a) any report of a committee of the House, if the report is published with the permission of the committee; or
(b) any debate or proceeding of the House, if the publication is authorized by the House by a resolution passed with the requisite majority.

Article 231: Power of President to suspend financial provisions of Constitution
(1) If at any time it appears to the President that the financial stability or credit of India is threatened, he may, after consultation with the Governor of each State, by order suspend for such period as he may specify any provision of this Constitution relating to—
(a) the borrowing of money or the giving of any guarantee by the Government of India or by any State; or
(b) the raising of any loan or the making of any grant by Parliament or by the Legislature of any State; or
(c) the incurring of any expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India or the Consolidated Fund of a State.
(2) Any order made under this article shall be laid before Parliament and the Legislature of each State as soon as may be after it is made and shall be subject to such modifications as Parliament or the Legislature of the State may make.

Article 232: Power of President to authorise expenditure in advance
(1) The President may, with the consent of the Parliament, authorise expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India, pending the completion of the procedure prescribed in Article 114 for the appropriation of moneys out of that Fund.
(2) No such expenditure shall be incurred for a period exceeding four months without the sanction of Parliament.

Article 233: Salaries and allowances of the Comptroller and Auditor-General and his officers
(1) The salaries and allowances of the Comptroller and Auditor-General and of the members of his staff shall be charged on the Consolidated Fund of India.
(2) The salaries and allowances shall not be diminished during their continuance in office.

Article 234: Power of President to authorise expenditure in advance (1) The President may, with the consent of the Parliament, authorise expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India, pending the completion of the procedure prescribed in Article 114 for the appropriation of moneys out of that Fund. (2) No such expenditure shall be incurred for a period exceeding four months without the sanction of Parliament.

Article 235: Power of President to suspend financial emergency
(1) If the President is satisfied that a situation has arisen whereby the financial stability or credit of India is threatened, he may, by a Proclamation, declare that a financial emergency exists.
(2) A Proclamation issued under clause (1) shall be laid before each House of Parliament and shall, except where it is revoked, cease to operate at the expiration of two months from the date on which it is so laid or, if before the expiration of that period resolutions disapproving it have been passed by both Houses of Parliament, on the date on which the first of those resolutions is passed.
(3) If and so long as a Proclamation of financial emergency is in operation, the President may, by order, make such provision for the regulation of the financial system of the Union or of any State as he may deem necessary.

Article 236: Power of President to authorise expenditure in advance
(1) The President may, with the consent of the Parliament, authorise expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India, pending the completion of the procedure prescribed in Article 114 for the appropriation of moneys out of that Fund.
(2) No such expenditure shall be incurred for a period exceeding four months without the sanction of Parliament.

Article 237: Power of President to authorize expenditure in respect of certain financial matters in certain contingencies

Article 238: Public Debt of India
(1) The executive power of the Union extends to borrowing money, whether on the security of the Consolidated Fund of India or otherwise, and to the giving of guarantees of the repayment of money borrowed by other persons or bodies.
(2) No such guarantee shall be given without the consent of Parliament.

Article 239: Delhi, Ajmer and other Union territories
(1) The President may, by order, declare any area to be a Union territory.
(2) The power of the President to make any order under clause (1) shall include the power to alter the boundaries of any Union territory or to alter the name of any Union territory.
(3) The provisions of this Constitution shall apply to a Union territory subject to such exceptions and modifications as the President may by order specify.

Article 240: Power of President to create new All India Services
(1) The President may, by order, create one or more All India Services common to the Union and the States.
(2) Every All India Service shall consist of such members as the President may from time to time appoint.
(3) The conditions of service of persons appointed to any All India Service shall be such as may be prescribed by or under any law made by Parliament.

Article 241: High Courts' power to issue certain writs
(1) The High Court shall have power, throughout the territories in relation to which it exercises jurisdiction, to issue to any person or authority, including in appropriate cases, any Government, directions, orders or writs, including writs in the nature of habeas corpus, mandamus, prohibition, quo warranto and certiorari, or any of them, for the enforcement of any of the rights conferred by Part III and for any other purpose.
(2) The power conferred by clause (1) shall not be in derogation of the power conferred on the Supreme Court by Article 32.

Article 242: Administration of tribal areas
(1) The President may, with the consent of the Parliament, by order, direct that any area in the States of Assam, Meghalaya, Tripura and Mizoram shall be administered as a tribal area.
(2) An order made under clause (1) may, from time to time, be modified or revoked by the President by a like order.
(3) The administration of a tribal area under this article shall be carried on in accordance with the provisions of any law made by Parliament for the purpose.

Article 243: Constitution of Panchayats
(1) There shall be constituted in every State, Panchayats at the village, intermediate and district levels, to function as units of self-government.
(2) The composition of Panchayats at each level shall be as provided in the Constitution of each State.
(3) The powers and functions of Panchayats at each level shall be as provided in the Constitution of each State.
(4) The State Legislature may, by law, make provisions with respect to—
(a) the manner in which and the extent to which, powers and functions may be transferred to Panchayats at the district, intermediate and village levels under this article;
(b) the number of seats to be reserved for women and the reservation of seats in Panchayats in favour of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes, in accordance with the provisions of the Constitution.

Article 244: Creation of new States and alteration of areas, boundaries or names of existing States
(1) Parliament may by law—
(a) create a new State by separation of territory from any State or by uniting two or more States or parts of States or by uniting any territory to a State;
(b) increase the area of any State;
(c) diminish the area of any State;
(d) alter the boundaries of any State;
(e) alter the name of any State.

Article 245: Power of Parliament to make laws

Article 246: Legislative Powers of the Union
(1) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, Parliament may make laws for the whole or any part of the territory of India.
(2) Parliament has exclusive power to make laws with respect to any of the matters enumerated in List I in the Seventh Schedule.
(3) Parliament and, subject to the provisions of Article 249, the Legislatures of States have power to make laws with respect to any of the matters enumerated in List III in the Seventh Schedule.
(4) The power of Parliament to make laws with respect to any matter enumerated in List II in the Seventh Schedule shall be subject to the provisions of Article 254.

Article 247: Control over public moneys
(1) All revenues received by the Government of India, except those assigned to the States by the Constitution, shall form one consolidated fund to be called the Consolidated Fund of India.
(2) All expenditure incurred by the Government of India, except that relating to the States, shall be charged on the Consolidated Fund of India.
(3) No moneys out of the Consolidated Fund of India shall be appropriated except in accordance with law passed by Parliament.

Article 248: Power of Parliament to make laws with respect to any matter

Article 250: Power of Parliament to legislate with respect to certain matters in the State List
(1) Notwithstanding anything in the Lists in the Seventh Schedule, Parliament has power to make laws with respect to any of the matters enumerated in the State List if and in so far as Parliament considers it necessary or expedient to do so for the purpose of implementing any treaty, agreement or convention with any other country or countries or any decision made at any international conference, association or other body.
(2) Parliament shall, while making any law under clause (1), have due regard to the interests of the States concerned.

Article 251: Power of Parliament to legislate with respect to matters in the State List in the national interest
(1) Notwithstanding anything in the foregoing provisions of this Chapter, Parliament may make laws with respect to any of the matters enumerated in the State List if the Rajya Sabha has passed a resolution to that effect by a majority of not less than two-thirds of the members present and voting.
(2) Any law made by Parliament under clause (1) shall be subject to the provisions of Article 254.
A
rticle 252: Power of Parliament to make laws with respect to certain matters in the State List in the national interest

Article 253: Power of Parliament to legislate with respect to matters in the State List in certain cases
(1) Notwithstanding anything in the foregoing provisions of this Chapter, Parliament may make laws with respect to any of the matters enumerated in the State List ifParliament deems it necessary or expedient in the national interest so to do. (2) In the case of a law made by Parliament under clause (1), the provisions of Article 249 shall apply as if the law had been made for a matter enumerated in the Union List.

Article 254: Inconsistency between laws made by the Parliament and laws made by the State Legislature
(1) If any provision of a law made by the State Legislature with respect to a matter enumerated in the Concurrent List is repugnant to any provision of a law made by Parliament with respect to the same matter, then, the law made by Parliament shall prevail, and the law made by the State Legislature shall, to the extent of the repugnancy, be void.
(2) Where a law made by the State Legislature with respect to a matter enumerated in the Concurrent List contains any provision repugnant to any provision of an existing law made by Parliament with respect to the same matter, then, the law made by the State Legislature shall, to the extent of the repugnancy, be void.

Article 255: Power of President to authorise expenditure in case of emergency

Article 256: Power of State legislature to make laws for giving effect to directives of Union
(1) The State legislature shall have power to make laws for giving effect to any such directive as is mentioned in clause (1) of Article 37.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such law may provide for
(a) the establishment of an administrative machinery for securing compliance with the directive and for the punishment of those who fail to comply with it;
(b) the giving of effect to the directive by executive action; or
(c) the giving of effect to the directive by subordinate legislation.

Article 257: Power of the President to create new All India Services
(1) The President may, by order, create one or more All India Services common to the Union and the States.
(2) Any All India Service created under clause (1) shall consist of such members as the President may, by order, determine.
(3) The conditions of service of persons appointed to any All India Service shall be such as may be prescribed by Parliament by law.

Article 258: Power of President to confer powers to certain officers
(1) The President may, by order, confer on any person or authority, subject to such conditions and limitations as he may specify, such powers as he may deem necessary or expedient to enable that person or authority to exercise the powers and perform the duties conferred on him by or under this Constitution or any other law for the time being in force.
(2) An order made under this article may be varied or revoked by a subsequent order made by the President.

Article 259: Power of President to authorise expenditure in advance
(1) The President may, with the consent of the Parliament, authorise expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India, pending the completion of the procedure prescribed in Article 114 for the appropriation of moneys out of that Fund.
(2) No such expenditure shall be incurred for a period exceeding four months without the sanction of Parliament.

Article 260: Power of President to remit fines, etc.
(1) The President may, in his discretion, remit the whole or any part of any fine or penalty imposed under any law for the time being in force.
(2) The President may, in his discretion, suspend the execution of any sentence of imprisonment imposed under any law for the time being in force, and may order the release of the person sentenced to imprisonment, either unconditionally or on such conditions as the President may think fit to impose.

Article 261: Power of the President to grant pardons, reprieves, respites or remissions of punishment or to suspend, remit or commute the sentence of any person convicted of any offence
(1) The President shall have the power to grant pardons, reprieves, respites or remissions of punishment or to suspend, remit or commute the sentence of any person convicted of any offence, including an offence against any law relating to a matter to which the executive power of the Union extends.
(2) Nothing in sub-clause (1) shall affect the power of the President to suspend, remit or commute the sentence of any person convicted by a court martial.

Article 262: Grants for certain purposes
(1) The Parliament may, by law, make provision for the grants by the Union to a State or to two or more States together, for any purpose, subject to such conditions as Parliament may impose.
(2) No such law shall be passed except after recommendations of the President.

Article 263: Power of President to authorise expenditure in respect of certain contingencies
(1) If the President is satisfied that circumstances exist which render it necessary for him to take immediate action to meet a situation arising out of war or external aggression or internal disturbance, he may, by order, authorise the Union to make any expenditure out of the Consolidated Fund of India, which would not otherwise be admissible.
(2) Every order made under this article shall be laid before Parliament as soon as may be after it is made, and shall be subject to such modification as Parliament may make.

Article 264: Power of President to make advances out of the Consolidated Fund of India
(1) The President may, with the consent of the Parliament, make advances out of the Consolidated Fund of India to meet any unforeseen expenditure, pending the completion of the procedure prescribed in Article 114 for the appropriation of moneys out of that Fund.
(2) The repayment of any advance made under this article shall be made out of the Consolidated Fund of India as soon as the appropriation is made for the purpose.

Article 265: Power of President to authorise expenditure in excess of appropriations (1) The President shall have power to authorise expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India in excess of the amount authorised by any appropriation made by law, if such expenditure is incurred for the purpose of meeting a sudden and unforeseen emergency: Provided that no such expenditure shall be incurred for a period exceeding three months without the sanction of Parliament. (2) No expenditure incurred in pursuance of an authorisation under clause (1) shall be made unless the President has, before the expiry of the period of three months referred to in that clause, laid before Parliament a statement of the reasons for the expenditure and of the amount so incurred. (3) Parliament may, by law, provide for the extension of the period of three months referred to in clause (1) for a further period not exceeding three months.

Article 266: Consolidated Fund of India
(1) All revenues received by the Government of India, except those specified in Article 267, shall be credited to the Consolidated Fund of India.
(2) All payments out of the Consolidated Fund of India shall be made by warrant under the hand of the Controller-General of Accounts.

Article 267: Custody of Consolidated Fund, Contingency Fund and Public Accounts
(1) The Consolidated Fund of India shall be held by the Controller-General of Accounts, who shall also be the custodian of the Contingency Fund of India.
(2) The accounts of the Union and of the States shall be kept in such form as the President may, with the consent of the Parliament, prescribe.
(3) The President shall cause to be published annually in the Official Gazette a statement of the estimated receipts and expenditure of the Union for the following financial year.
(4) The President shall cause to be presented to Parliament annually a statement of the actual receipts and expenditure of the Union for the previous financial year.

Article 268: Taxes on income other than agricultural income
(1) All taxes on income other than agricultural income shall be levied and collected by the Union, but such taxes may be assigned to the States by Parliament by law.
(2) Parliament may by law provide that the whole or any part of any such tax which is assigned to any State shall be paid into the Consolidated Fund of that State.

Article 269: Duties levied and collected by the Union but assigned to the States
(1) The Parliament may by law impose, or authorise the imposition of, a duty of excise on such goods as may be specified in the law, and the proceeds of such duty shall be assigned to the States in accordance with such principles as may be laid down by Parliament by law.
(2) Parliament may by law also provide for the assignment of any other tax to the States.

Article 270: Recovery of sums wrongly drawn from the Consolidated Fund of India
(1) Where any money has been wrongly drawn from the Consolidated Fund of India, the President may, after such inquiry as he thinks fit, order that the amount shall be recovered from the person responsible for the wrong withdrawal.
(2) The amount so recovered shall be paid into the Consolidated Fund of India.

Article 271: Distribution of proceeds of taxes on income between Union and States
(1) All taxes on income other than agricultural income shall be levied and collected by the Union but shall be assigned to the States in the manner provided in the Eleventh Schedule.
(2) The States shall be free to levy such surcharge on any such tax as they may deem fit.
(3) Where any surcharge has been levied by a State on any such tax, the proceeds of that surcharge shall be assigned to the State.

Article 272: Grants for special purposes
(1) The President may, if satisfied that it is necessary or expedient in the public interest so to do, by order direct that any sums required to meet any expenditure for a specific purpose shall be charged on the Consolidated Fund of India.
(2) No such order shall be made unless a statement explaining the reasons for the order has been laid before Parliament.
(3) No expenditure shall be incurred under this article after the expiry of the financial year in which the order is made unless the order has been approved by Parliament by a resolution before the expiry of that year.

Article 273: Power of Parliament to make grants for specific purposes
(1) Parliament may, by law, make provision for the grant of moneys to a State to meet a specific need of the State arising out of:—
(a) an emergency or calamity of a widespread nature; or
(b) a scheme undertaken by the State with the approval of the Government of India for economic development or in order to raise the standard of living of the people of the State.
(2) A law made under clause (1) shall be laid before the House of the People, and shall not be deemed to be a money bill.

Article 274: Power of President to authorise expenditure in advance
(1) The President may, with the consent of the Parliament, authorise expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India, pending the completion of the procedure prescribed in Article 114 for the appropriation of moneys out of that Fund.
(2) No such expenditure shall be incurred for a period exceeding four months without the sanction of Parliament.

Article 275: Grants for Local Bodies
(1) The President may, after considering the recommendations of the Finance Commission, by order direct that sums from the Consolidated Fund of India shall be paid to such local authorities, or to such classes of local authorities, as he may specify in the order, for such purposes as he may specify.
(2) The order of the President under this article shall be laid before each House of Parliament.

Article 276: Contingency Fund of India
(1) There shall be a Contingency Fund of India to be administered by the President.
(2) The moneys in the Contingency Fund of India shall be expended by the President for the purpose of meeting unforeseen expenditure pending the sanction of Parliament.
(3) The President shall, as soon as possible after the expenditure has been incurred, cause a statement of the expenditure to be laid before Parliament.

Article 277: Surrender of surplus funds to the President
(1) If, at the end of any financial year, the balance in the Consolidated Fund of India is such that the amount is not required for the purposes of the current financial year, the President shall make a report on the surplus to Parliament.
(2) Parliament may, by law, provide for the surrender of the surplus to the President, and the President shall dispose of the surplus in accordance with such law.

Article 278: Power of President to authorise expenditure in advance
(1) The President may, with the consent of the Parliament, authorise expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India, pending the completion of the procedure prescribed in Article 114 for the appropriation of moneys out of that Fund.
(2) No such expenditure shall be incurred for a period exceeding four months without the sanction of Parliament.

Article 279: Contingency Fund of India
(1) There shall be a Contingency Fund of India to be administered by the President.
(2) The said Fund shall consist of such sums as may be provided by Parliament by law.
(3) The President shall have power, out of the said Fund, to make advances to meet unforeseen expenditure pending the appropriation thereof by Parliament.
(4) The repayment of any advance made under clause (3) shall be made in accordance with such directions as may be given by Parliament.

Article 280: Power of President to vary grants in case of emergency

Article 281: Disallowance of expenditure by President
(1) If in the opinion of the President any moneys have been spent by the Government of India, or by any State Government, in excess of the amount authorised by any law made by Parliament or the Legislature of the State, as the case may be, the President may disallow the expenditure so incurred.
(2) The President shall cause a statement of the disallowance to be laid before Parliament or the Legislature of the State, as the case may be.
(3) Where any expenditure has been disallowed under this article, it shall be deemed to have been incurred without authority and shall be recoverable.

Article 282: Power of Parliament to make grants for special purposes
(1) Parliament may, on the recommendation of the President, make grants for any special purpose, not provided for by any existing law, for the benefit of the whole Union or any part thereof.
(2) No such grant shall be made unless the House of the People has passed a resolution approving the grant.

Article 283: Power of President to authorise expenditure in advance
(1) The President may, with the consent of the Parliament, authorise expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India, pending the completion of the procedure prescribed in Article 114 for the appropriation of moneys out of that Fund.
(2) No such expenditure shall be incurred for a period exceeding four months without the sanction of Parliament.

Article 284: Power of President to authorise expenditure in advance
(1) The President may, with the consent of the Parliament, authorise expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India, pending the completion of the procedure prescribed in Article 114 for the appropriation of moneys out of that Fund.
(2) No such expenditure shall be incurred for a period exceeding four months without the sanction of Parliament.

Article 285: Power of President to authorise expenditure pending sanction of Parliament
(1) The President may, with the consent of the Parliament, authorise expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India, pending the sanction of Parliament of a demand for a grant in respect of such expenditure.
(2) No such expenditure shall be incurred for a period exceeding three months without the sanction of Parliament.

Article 286: Grants in aid of State revenues
(1) The President may, if he is satisfied that the revenue of any State for any financial year will not be sufficient for the purpose of meeting the expenditure which the State is authorised to meet from its revenues, make to that State a grant of such sums as he may consider necessary to meet the deficiency.
(2) The decision of the President as to the quantum of the grant and the purpose for which it is to be made shall be final.

Article 287: Power of State Legislature to make laws with respect to certain matters in the State List in which Parliament has also power to make laws

Article 288: Borrowing by the Government of India
(1) The Government of India may, with the consent of the Parliament, borrow moneys by raising loans or by the issue of treasury bills, notes or bonds.
(2) The Parliament may, by law, authorise the Government of India to borrow moneys for specified purposes.
(3) The moneys raised by the Government of India by borrowing shall be treated as part of the Consolidated Fund of India.

Article 289: Audit of expenditure of Union and State Governments
(1) The accounts of the Union and of every State and of all moneys received and expenditure incurred by the Union and by every State shall be kept in such form as the President may, by order, prescribe.
(2) The accounts shall be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India who shall submit his report to the President.
(3) The President shall cause the report to be laid before each House of Parliament.

Article 290: Grants in aid of revenues of State
(1) The President may, after consultation with the Governments of the States concerned, by order, make such grants in aid of the revenues of any State as he may consider necessary to meet the shortfall in the revenue of that State arising from any extraordinary or abnormal circumstances.
(2) The amount of any grant made under this article shall be paid out of the Consolidated Fund of India.

Article 291: Consolidated Fund of India
(1) All revenues received by the Government of India, except those specified in articles 268, 269, and 270, shall form part of the Consolidated Fund of India.
(2) All loans raised by the Government of India shall be repaid out of the Consolidated Fund of India.
(3) All other receipts and expenditure of the Government of India shall be credited to or debited from the Consolidated Fund of India.

Article 292: Grants for special purposes
(1) The President may, if satisfied that it is necessary or expedient in the public interest so to do, by order direct that any sums of money with in the Consolidated Fund of India or the Public Account of India be appropriated for the purpose of any special service or purpose, notwithstanding that no provision for the appropriation of such sums has been made by any law passed by Parliament.
(2) No order under this article shall be made unless the President has consulted the Finance Minister.
(3) Every order made under this article shall be laid before Parliament.

Article 293: Power of the President to make grants in advance (1) The President may, if satisfied that it is necessary or expedient in the public interest so to do, make a grant of money out of the Consolidated Fund of India to any State to meet a sudden and extraordinary demand on the resources of that State.(2) The decision of the President as to the amount of any such grant and the purposes to which it shall be applied shall be final. (3) No such grant shall be made except after consultation with the Governor of the State concerned.

Article 294: Power of President to make advances out of the Consolidated Fund of India
(1) The President may, with the consent of the Parliament, make advances out of the Consolidated Fund of India to meet any unforeseen expenditure which, in his opinion, is necessary to be incurred for the purposes of the Union.
(2) The advances made under this article shall be repaid as soon as possible out of the Consolidated Fund of India.

Article 295: Prohibition of certain expenditure
(1) No money out of the Consolidated Fund of India or out of any of the Consolidated Funds of the States shall be appropriated for any religious purpose.
(2) No religious instruction shall be imparted in any educational institution wholly or partly maintained out of State funds.

Article 296: Power of President to authorise expenditure in advance
(1) The President may, with the consent of the Parliament, authorise expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India, pending the completion of the procedure prescribed in Article 114 for the appropriation of moneys out of that Fund.
(2) No such expenditure shall be incurred for a period exceeding four months without the sanction of Parliament.

Article 297: Custody of Consolidated Fund of India, etc.
(1) The Consolidated Fund of India shall be held by the President, who shall be entitled to authorise the withdrawal of moneys therefrom for the purposes of the Union.
(2) No moneys out of the Consolidated Fund of India shall be appropriated except in accordance with law.

Article 298: Power of President to authorise expenditure in advance
(1) The President may, with the consent of the Parliament, authorise expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India, pending the completion of the procedure prescribed in Article 114 for the appropriation of moneys out of that Fund.
(2) No such expenditure shall be incurred for a period exceeding four months without the sanction of Parliament.

Article 299: Power of Parliament to authorise expenditure for certain purposes
(1) Notwithstanding anything in Article 112, Parliament may, by law, authorise the President to withdraw from the Consolidated Fund of India such sums as may be necessary for the purposes specified in the law and the law shall be laid before the House of the People before it is passed.
(2) No such law shall be passed after the expiry of five years from the commencement of this Constitution.

Article 300: Power of Parliament to make laws for giving effect to Fundamental Rights
(1) Parliament may by law make provision for the exercise of any of the Fundamental Rights, subject to such restrictions as it may think fit, in the interests of the security of the State, friendly relations with foreign States, public order, decency or morality, or in relation to contempt of court, defamation or incitement to an offence.
(2) Nothing in sub-clause (a) of clause (1) shall affect the operation of any existing law in so far as it relates to any of the matters specified in the said sub-clause.

Article 301: Freedom of trade, commerce and intercourse
Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, trade, commerce and intercourse throughout the territory of India shall be free.

Article 302: Power of President to promulgate Ordinances during recess of Parliament
(1) If at any time, when the Parliament is not in session, the President is satisfied that circumstances exist which render it necessary for him to take immediate action, he may, by Proclamation, make such provision for the purpose as he deems necessary.
(2) Such Proclamation may be made for any purpose which the Parliament would be competent to enact, but shall be laid before Parliament as soon as possible after it is issued and shall cease to operate at the expiration of six weeks from the date of its publication, unless before the expiration of that period it has been approved by resolutions of both Houses of Parliament.

Article 303: Power of Parliament to legislate with respect to certain matters in the State List
(1) Notwithstanding anything in the foregoing provisions of this Chapter, Parliament may, by law, make provision with respect to any of the matters enumerated in the State List for the whole or any part of the territory of India, if and insofar as the Parliament considers it necessary or expedient in the national interest so to do.
(2) In making any law under clause (1), Parliament shall be guided by the principles specified in clause (1) of Article 302.

Article 304: No demand for a grant can be made except on the recommendation of the President

Article 305: Expenditure charged on the Consolidated Fund of India
(1) The following expenditure shall be charged on the Consolidated Fund of India:—
(a) the salaries and allowances of the President and other officers of the Union in respect of services rendered by them in connection with the affairs of the Union; and
(b) all other expenditure incurred for the purpose of the Union, including the service of debt incurred by the Government of India by law or otherwise.

Article 306: Power of President to suspend financial emergency
(1) If the President is satisfied that a financial emergency exists, he may, by Proclamation, make a declaration to that effect.
(2) A Proclamation under clause (1) shall be laid before each House of Parliament and shall, unless revoked, continue in force for a period of six months, but may be extended by a further Proclamation for a period not exceeding six months at a time.
(3) The President shall not issue a Proclamation under clause (1) unless the decision of the Union Cabinet to do so has been approved by a resolution of both Houses of Parliament passed by a majority of not less than two-thirds of the members of each House present and voting.
(4) If at any time the Lok Sabha is dissolved, a Proclamation issued under clause (1) shall cease to operate at the expiration of thirty days after the first sitting of the Lok Sabha after its reconstitution.

Article 307: Appointment of authority for carrying out the purposes of articles 301 to 304
Parliament may by law appoint such authority as it considers appropriate for carrying out the purposes of articles 301, 302, 303 and 304, and confer on the authority so appointed such powers and such duties as it thinks necessary.

Article 308: Power of President to authorise expenditure in case of failure of Money Bills
(1) If at any time, it is found that moneys are required to meet an unforeseen expenditure which cannot be met out of the existing sources of revenue, the President may, after consulting the Council of Ministers, authorise expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India to meet such expenditure, pending the sanction of Parliament by law.
(2) The President shall, as soon as possible, cause a statement of the expenditure so authorised to be laid before Parliament.

Article 309: Power of President to regulate the conditions of service of persons serving the Union. (1) The President may, by order, regulate the conditions of service of persons serving the Union in connection with the affairs of the Union. (2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such order may provide for— (a) the manner in which appointments to such service may be made; (b) the powers and duties of persons serving in such service; and (c) the conditions governing the pay, allowances, leave, pensions and other matters relating to the service of such persons. (3) Any order made under this article shall be laid before Parliament.

Article 310: Restriction on power of President to remove certain officers
(1) Notwithstanding anything in the provisions of Article 311, the President shall not be competent to remove a person from a civil service of the Union or a State holding a lien on a civil post under the Union or a State, unless the President is satisfied that such person has been guilty of misconduct.
(2) In this article, the expression "civil service of the Union or a State" includes a service or post declared by Parliament or the Legislature of the State, by law, to be a civil service of the Union or a State, as the case may be.

Article 311: Protection of Civil Servants against removal from office and certain other matters
(1) No person who is a member of a civil service of the Union or a State or holds a civil post under the Union or a State shall be dismissed or removed by an authority subordinate to that by which he was appointed.
(2) No such person shall be dismissed or removed or reduced in rank except after an inquiry in which he has been given a reasonable opportunity of being heard.
(3) Save as provided in this article, no such person shall be dismissed or removed or reduced in rank without the concurrence of the President or the Governor of the State, as the case may be.

Article 312: Special provisions with respect to certain States
(1) Notwithstanding anything in this Chapter, Parliament may by law provide for the establishment of a separate Public Service Commission for a State or for two or more States, or for any part of a State, and may define the jurisdiction and powers of such Commission and its conditions of service.
(2) A Public Service Commission constituted under clause (1) shall not be dissolved except by an Act of Parliament.

Article 313: Contingency Fund of India
(1) There shall be a Contingency Fund of India to be administered by the President.
(2) The amount of the Contingency Fund of India shall be such as may be prescribed by Parliament.
(3) The President shall be entitled to draw on the Contingency Fund of India for the purpose of meeting unforeseen expenditure pending the authorization of such expenditure by Parliament.
(4) The President shall cause to be laid before Parliament, as soon as may be after such expenditure has been incurred, a statement of the expenditure incurred under this article.

Article 314: Audit of expenditure charged on the Consolidated Fund of India
(1) The expenditure charged on the Consolidated Fund of India shall be subject to audit by the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India.
(2) The provisions of Article 148 shall apply in relation to the audit of expenditure charged on the Consolidated Fund of India as they apply in relation to the audit of other expenditure of the Union.

Article 315: Finance Commission
(1) There shall be constituted a Finance Commission consisting of a Chairman and four other members to be appointed by the President.
(2) The Chairman shall be a person who has held office as a Judge of the Supreme Court or of a High Court for at least two years.
(3) The other members shall be persons having special knowledge of finance and administration.
(4) The Finance Commission shall be appointed for a period of five years and shall be eligible for reappointment.

Article 316: Disallowance of expenditure by President
(1) If in the opinion of the President any moneys have been spent by the Government of India, or by any State Government, in contravention of any of the provisions of this Chapter, the President may, after such inquiry as he thinks fit, disallow the expenditure.
(2) Where any expenditure has been disallowed by the President under this article, no further payment shall be made in respect of that expenditure.

Article 317: Special provision as to the salaries and allowances of the Judges of the Supreme Court and of the High Courts
(1) The salaries, allowances and other conditions of service of the Judges of the Supreme Court shall be determined by Parliament by law and shall not be varied to their disadvantage after their appointment.
(2) The salaries, allowances and other conditions of service of the Judges of a High Court shall be determined by the President by order and shall not be varied to their disadvantage after their appointment.
(3) Every order made under clause (2) shall be laid before Parliament.

Article 318: Power to make regulations as to conditions of service of members and staff of the Commission.
(1) The President may, by order, make regulations—
(a) determining the number of members of the Commission and their conditions of service; and
(b) making provision with respect to the number of members of the staff of the Commission and their conditions of service:
Provided that the conditions of service of a member of the Commission shall not be varied to his disadvantage after his appointment.

Article 319: Salaries and allowances of members of Parliament
(1) The salaries and allowances of members of Parliament shall be such as may be determined by Parliament by law and, until provision is so made, shall be as specified in the Second Schedule.
(2) No discussion shall take place in Parliament with respect to the salaries and allowances of the members of Parliament.

Article 320: Public Service Commissions
(1) There shall be a Public Service Commission for the Union and a Public Service Commission for each State.
(2) The Union Public Service Commission shall consist of a Chairman and two or more members to be appointed by the President.
(3) A Public Service Commission for a State shall consist of a Chairman and two or more members to be appointed by the Governor of the State.
(4) The Chairman and members of a Public Service Commission shall be appointed by the President or the Governor, as the case may be, in consultation with the Chief Justice of India.
(5) The conditions of service of the Chairman and members of a Public Service Commission shall be such as may be prescribed by Parliament by law.

Article 321: Public Service Commissions for Union and States
(1) There shall be a Public Service Commission for the Union and a Public Service Commission for each State.
(2) The Union Public Service Commission shall consist of a Chairman and two or more members to be appointed by the President.
(3) A Public Service Commission for a State shall consist of a Chairman and two or more members to be appointed by the Governor of the State.

Article 322: Power of President to authorise expenditure in advance (1) The President may, with the consent of the Parliament, authorise expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India, pending the completion of the procedure prescribed in Article 114 for the appropriation of moneys out of that Fund. (2) No such expenditure shall be incurred for a period exceeding four months without the sanction of Parliament.

Article 323: Public Service Commissions for Union and States
(1) There shall be a Public Service Commission for the Union and a Public Service Commission for each State.
(2) The Union Public Service Commission shall be appointed by the President and the State Public Service Commissions shall be appointed by the Governor of the State.
(3) The Chairman and other members of a Public Service Commission shall be appointed by the President or the Governor, as the case may be, in consultation with the Chief Justice of India.
(4) A Public Service Commission shall consist of a Chairman and two or more members.
(5) The conditions of service of the Chairman and other members of a Public Service Commission shall be such as may be prescribed by law.

Article 324: Election Commission of India
(1) The Election Commission shall consist of the Chief Election Commissioner and such number of other Election Commissioners, if any, as the President may from time to time fix.
(2) The Chief Election Commissioner shall be appointed by the President and the other Election Commissioners shall be appointed by the President on the recommendation of the Chief Election Commissioner.
(3) The term of office of the Chief Election Commissioner and other Election Commissioners shall be six years from the date on which they enter upon their office: Provided that—
(a) a person who has held office as a Judge of the Supreme Court shall be eligible for appointment as the Chief Election Commissioner or an Election Commissioner for a further term, if he is otherwise qualified; and
(b) the Chief Election Commissioner or an Election Commissioner shall not be eligible for further appointment as such after he has completed two terms.
(4) The Chief Election Commissioner shall not be removed from his office except by an order of the President passed after an inquiry in which he has been given a reasonable opportunity of being heard.
(5) The other Election Commissioners shall be removed from office by the President, on the recommendation of the Chief Election Commissioner, if the Chief Election Commissioner is satisfied that they are no longer fit to hold office.
(6) The Chief Election Commissioner and other Election Commissioners shall be entitled to such salaries and allowances as may be determined by Parliament by law and shall be entitled to such privileges and other facilities as may be determined by the President.

Article 325: Prohibition of discrimination on grounds of religion, race, caste, sex or place of birth

Article 326: Elections to the House of the People
(1) The elections to the House of the People shall be on the basis of adult suffrage; that is to say, every person who is a citizen of India and who is not less than eighteen years of age on such date as may be fixed in that behalf by or under any law made by the appropriate Legislature and is not otherwise disqualified under this Constitution or any law made by the appropriate Legislature on the ground of non-residence, unsoundness of mind, crime or corrupt or illegal practice, shall be entitled to be registered as a voter at any such election.
(2) No person shall be ineligible for inclusion in any such electoral roll or for voting at any such election on the ground of religion, race, caste, sex or any of them.

Article 327: Special provision with respect to the States of Nagaland, Meghalaya and Mizoram
(1) Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, the Legislature of a State referred to in sub-clause (a) of clause (1) of article 371 shall have power to make laws with respect to any of the matters enumerated in the State List in the Seventh Schedule, except the matters relating to:—
(a) Scheduled Tribes; and
(b) the administration of justice, including constitution and composition of courts, for the scheduled tribes in the State.
(2) The provisions of clause (1) shall not be construed as affecting the provisions of article 339.

Article 328: Powers of President to authorise expenditure
(1) The President shall have power to authorise, out of the moneys to be provided by the Parliament by law in this behalf, such sums as may be necessary for the purpose of meeting any unforeseen expenditure, which is not covered by any existing provision of law.
(2) The President shall have power to authorise expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India for the purpose of meeting any demand certified by the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India to be urgent and unavoidable, if the demand is presented to him after the expiration of the financial year to which it relates.

Article 329: Bar to interference by courts in electoral matters
(1) Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution—
(a) the validity of any law relating to the delimitation of constituencies or the allotment of seats to such constituencies, made or purporting to be made under article 327 or article 328, shall not be called in question in any court;
(b) no election to either House of Parliament or to the House or either House of the Legislature of a State shall be called in question except by an election petition presented to such authority and in such manner as may be provided for by or under any law made by the appropriate Legislature.
(2) No election to either House of Parliament or to the House or either House of the Legislature of a State shall be called in question except by an election petition which shall be disposed of in accordance with the provisions of any law made by the appropriate Legislature.

Article 330: Special provisions for the representation of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in the House of the People and in the Legislative Assemblies of the States

Article 331: Special provision for Anglo-Indians
(1) Notwithstanding anything in the foregoing provisions of this Chapter, the President may, by order made with the prior recommendation of the Rajya Sabha, provide for the representation of the Anglo-Indian community in the House of the People in such manner as he may deem fit: Provided that the number of seats so reserved shall not exceed two. (2) No person shall be qualified to be elected to the House of the People as a representative of the Anglo-Indian community unless he is an Anglo-Indian.

Article 332: Reservation of seats for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in the Legislative Assemblies of the States
(1) Seats shall be reserved for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes, except the Scheduled Tribes in the autonomous districts of Assam, in the Legislative Assembly of every State.
(2) The number of seats reserved for the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes in the Legislative Assembly of any State under clause (1) shall bear, as nearly as may be, the same proportion to the total number of seats in the Assembly as the population of the Scheduled Castes in the State or of the Scheduled Tribes in the State or part of the State, as the case may be, in respect of which seats are so reserved, bears to the total population of the State.
(3) Notwithstanding anything in clause (2), the number of seats reserved in the Legislative Assembly of any State for the Scheduled Tribes in the autonomous districts of Assam shall bear to the total number of seats in the Assembly the same proportion as the population of the Scheduled Tribes in the said districts bears to the total population of the State:
Provided that the number of seats reserved for the Scheduled Tribes in the Legislative Assembly of the State of Assam shall not be less than the number of seats so reserved immediately before the commencement of the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, for those tribes in that State.

Article 333: Appropriation of Moneys for Public Purposes
(1) Where any money is, by any law, required to be appropriated for a public purpose, it shall be paid out of the Consolidated Fund of India.
(2) No money out of the Consolidated Fund of India shall be appropriated for any purpose other than a public purpose.
(3) No money shall be withdrawn from the Consolidated Fund of India except under appropriation made by law.

Article 334: Reservation of seats and special representation to cease after sixty years
(1) Notwithstanding anything in the foregoing provisions of this Part, the provisions of this Constitution relating to—
(a) the reservation of seats for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes in the House of the People and in the Legislative Assemblies of the States;
(b) the representation of the Anglo-Indian community in the House of the People and in the Legislative Assemblies of the States by nomination,
shall cease to have effect on the expiration of a period of sixty years from the commencement of this Constitution.
(2) Nothing in clause (1) shall affect—
(a) the representation in the House of the People of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes; and
(b) the representation in the Legislative Assemblies of the States of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes and of the Anglo-Indian community.

Article 335: Special provision for the advancement of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in services under the State.
(1) The State shall, in making any law providing for the appointment of any person to any office or employment under the State, or for the reservation of appointments or posts in favour of any class of persons, take into consideration the claims of the members of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes in that State.
(2) Nothing in this article shall prevent the State from making any provision for the reservation of appointments or posts in favour of any backward class of citizens which, in the opinion of the State, is not adequately represented in the services under the State.
(3) Nothing in this article shall affect the operation of any law which provides for the reservation of appointments or posts in favour of any class or classes of persons on the ground of sex.

Article 336: Special provision for Anglo-Indian community in certain services
(1) Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, the President may, if he is of opinion that the Anglo-Indian community is not adequately represented in the services under the State, make such provision as he thinks fit for the reservation of appointments or posts in favour of that community in the services under the State.
(2) The President may, by order, specify the services, the appointments or posts under the State to which the provision made under clause (1) shall apply and the extent to which, the manner in which and the conditions subject to which, it shall apply.

Article 337: Special provisions as to certain classes of claims

Article 338: National Commission for Scheduled Castes
(1) There shall be a Commission for the Scheduled Castes to be known as the National Commission for Scheduled Castes.
(2) Subject to the provisions of any law made in this behalf by Parliament, the Commission shall consist of a Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and three other Members and the conditions of service and tenure of office of the Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and other Members so appointed shall be such as the President may by rule determine.
(3) The Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and other Members of the Commission shall be appointed by the President by warrant under his hand and seal.
(4) The Commission shall have the power to regulate its own procedure.
(5) It shall be the duty of the Commission—
(a) to investigate and monitor all matters relating to the safeguards provided for the Scheduled Castes under this Constitution or under any other law for the time being in force or under any order of the Government and to evaluate the working of such safeguards;
(b) to inquire into specific complaints with respect to the deprivation of rights and safeguards of the Scheduled Castes;
(c) to participate and advise on the planning process of socio-economic development of the Scheduled Castes and to evaluate the progress of their development under the Union and any State;
(d) to present to the President, annually and at such other times as the Commission may deem fit, reports upon the working of those safeguards;
(e) to make in such reports recommendations as to the measures that should be taken by the Union or any State for the effective implementation of those safeguards and other measures for the protection, welfare and socio-economic development of the Scheduled Castes; and
(f) to discharge such other functions in relation to the protection, welfare and development and advancement of the Scheduled Castes as the President may, subject to the provisions of any law made by Parliament, by rule specify.

Article 339: Special provisions relating to certain States
(1) Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, the President may, by order, direct that in any State the provisions of this Constitution relating to—
(a) the reservation of seats for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in the Legislative Assembly of such State; or
(b) the representation of the Scheduled Tribes in the Lok Sabha and in the Legislative Assembly of such State by means of separate electorates, shall be applicable in such State subject to such modifications or adaptations as he may specify in the order.
(2) Any order made under clause (1) shall be laid before each House of Parliament.

Article 340: Special provision for the advancement of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes
(1) The President shall be empowered to appoint a Commission for the investigation of the conditions of socially and educationally backward classes of citizens other than Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes and the difficulties under which they labour and to make recommendations as to the steps to be taken by the Union or any State to remove such difficulties and to improve their condition.
(2) A Commission appointed under this article shall consist of a Chairman, who shall be a person having knowledge of the problems of the socially and educationally backward classes, and two other members who shall be appointed by the President.
(3) The Commission shall investigate the matters referred to it and make recommendations to the President as to the steps which should be taken by the Union or any State to remove the difficulties under which the backward classes labour and to improve their condition.

Article 341: Scheduled Castes
(1) The President may with respect to any State or Union territory, and where it is a State, after consultation with the Governor thereof, by public notification, specify the castes, races or tribes or parts of or groups within castes, races or tribes which shall for the purposes of this Constitution be deemed to be Scheduled Castes in relation to that State or Union territory, as the case may be.
(2) Parliament may by law include in or exclude from the list of Scheduled Castes specified in a notification issued under clause (1) any caste, race or tribe or part of or group within any caste, race or tribe, but save as aforesaid a notification issued under the said clause shall not be varied by any subsequent notification.
(3) In this article, the expression "Scheduled Castes" means such castes, races or tribes or parts of or groups within such castes, races or tribes as are deemed under article 341 to be Scheduled Castes for the purposes of this Constitution.

Article 342: Special provision for the advancement of scheduled castes
(1) The State shall, with a view to providing opportunities for the advancement of any socially and educationally backward classes of citizens, including the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes, take special measures, by way of reservations in appointments, or posts, or promotions, or in education, or in any other way, as the case may be, to secure their adequate representation in the services under the State.
(2) Nothing in this article shall prevent the State from making any provision for the reservation of appointments or posts in favor of any backward class of citizens which is not adequately represented in the services under the State.

Article 343: Official Language of the Union
(1) The official language of the Union shall be Hindi in Devanagari script. The English language shall continue to be used for all official purposes of the Union for which it was being used immediately before the commencement of this Constitution.
(2) Notwithstanding anything in clause (1), for a period of fifteen years from the commencement of this Constitution, the English language shall be used for all the official purposes of the Union for which it was being used immediately before the commencement of this Constitution, in addition to the Hindi language.
(3) After the expiry of the period of fifteen years referred to in clause (2), the language to be used for the official purposes of the Union shall be determined by the Parliament by law.

Article 344: Commission and Committee of Parliament on Official Language
(1) The President shall, at the expiration of five years from the commencement of this Constitution and thereafter at the expiration of ten years from such commencement, by order constitute a Commission which shall consist of a Chairman and such other members representing the different languages specified in the Eighth Schedule as the President may appoint, and the order shall define the procedure to be followed by the Commission.
(2) It shall be the duty of the Commission to make recommendations to the President as to—
(a) the progressive use of the Hindi language for the official purposes of the Union;
(b) restrictions on the use of the English language for all or any of the official purposes of the Union;
(c) the language to be used for all or any of the purposes mentioned in article 348;
(d) the form of numerals to be used for any one or more specified purposes of the Union;
(e) any other matter referred to the Commission by the President as regards the official language of the Union and the language for communication between the Union and a State or between one State and another and their use.
(3) In making their recommendations under clause (2), the Commission shall have due regard to the industrial, cultural and scientific advancement of India, and the just claims and the interests of persons belonging to the non-Hindi-speaking areas in regard to the public services.
(4) There shall be constituted a Committee consisting of thirty members, elected by the House of the People, to perform the functions of the Committee on Official Language referred to in clause (6) of article 344.

Article 345: Provisions as to expenditure charged on the Consolidated Fund of India
(1) No demand for a grant shall be made except on the recommendation of the President.
(2) No money shall be withdrawn from the Consolidated Fund of India except under appropriation made by law.
(3) No money out of the Consolidated Fund of India shall be appropriated except in accordance with law and for the purposes and in the manner provided in this Constitution.

Article 346: Restriction on the powers of the Legislature of a State with respect to trade and commerce.
(1) Notwithstanding anything in article 245, no law made by the Legislature of a State shall impose, or authorise the imposition of, a tax on the sale or purchase of goods where such sale or purchase takes place—
(a) outside the State; or
(b) in the course of the import of the goods into, or export of the goods out of, the territory of India.
(2) Parliament may by law formulate principles for determining when a sale or purchase of goods takes place in any of the ways mentioned in clause (1).
(3) Any law of a State shall, in so far as it imposes, or authorises the imposition of, a tax on the sale or purchase of goods declared by Parliament by law to be of special importance in inter-State trade or commerce, be subject to such restrictions and conditions in regard to the system of levy, rates and other incidents of the tax as Parliament may by law specify.

Article 347: Grants for raising the level of administration of Scheduled Areas and Scheduled Tribes

Article 348: Language to be used in the Supreme Court and in the High Courts and for Acts, Bills, etc.
(1) Notwithstanding anything in the foregoing provisions of this Part, until Parliament by law otherwise provides—
(a) all proceedings in the Supreme Court and in every High Court
(b) the authoritative texts—
(i) of all Bills to be introduced or amendments thereto to be moved in either House of Parliament or in the House or either House of the Legislature of a State;
(ii) of all Acts passed by Parliament or the Legislature of a State and of all Ordinances promulgated by the President or the Governor of a State;
(iii) of all orders, rules, regulations and bye-laws issued under this Constitution or under any law made by Parliament or the Legislature of a State,
shall be in the English language.
(2) Notwithstanding anything in sub-clause (a) of clause (1), the Governor of a State may, with the previous consent of the President, authorise the use of the Hindi language, or any other language used for any official purposes of the State, in proceedings in the High Court having its principal seat in that State: Provided that nothing in this clause shall apply to any judgment, decree or order passed or made by such High Court.

Article 349: Language of Bills, etc.
(1) Notwithstanding anything in the foregoing provisions of this Chapter, no Bill or amendment thereto shall be introduced in either House of Parliament of which the object is one of the following, namely:
(a) to make any change in the provisions of this Constitution relating to the official language of the Union or of a State; or
(b) to change the language of any Bill for the time being pending in either House of Parliament or of any amendment thereto; or
(c) to make any change in the language of any law which is in force in the whole or any part of India or which applies to citizens of India generally.
(2) Nothing in sub-clause (a) of clause (1) shall apply to a Bill or amendment which has been passed by the Legislature of a State and which, with the consent of the President, is presented to Parliament for its consideration.

Article 350: Special provisions as to the language to be used in representations for redress of grievances
(1) Every person shall have the right to submit a representation for redress of grievances to any public authority in any of the languages used in the Union of India and the authorities shall be obliged to consider the representations sympathetically and disposed of expeditiously.
(2) Where a representation in a language other than the language used by the public authority is received by it, the authority shall, as soon as practicable, translate the representation into the language used by the authority and take the necessary action on the representation.

Article 351: Official Language of the Union
(1) The official language of the Union shall be Hindi in Devanagari script. The English language shall continue to be used for all official purposes of the Union for which it was being used at the commencement of this Constitution.
(2) The President may, by order, make provision for the use of any other language, or languages, in addition to Hindi and English, for all or any of the official purposes of the Union.
(3) Nothing in clause (1) or clause (2) shall affect the use of any language by any person or authority in any part of India or in any Union territory for any purpose.

Article 352: Proclamation of Emergency
(1) If the President is satisfied that a grave emergency exists whereby the security of India or any part of the territory thereof is threatened, whether by war or external aggression or internal disturbance, he may, by Proclamation, make a declaration to that effect.
(2) A Proclamation issued under clause (1) shall be laid before each House of Parliament and shall, unless revoked earlier, cease to operate at the end of a period of six months from the date of its issue: Provided that, if the dissolution of the House of the People takes place during the said period, the Proclamation shall cease to operate at the expiration of thirty days from the date on which the House of the People first sits after its reconstitution.
(3) If the Proclamation is not revoked before the expiration of the said period of six months, or, if before the expiration of that period, the dissolution of the House of the People takes place, it shall be laid before the House of the People in the first session thereof which follows the dissolution and shall, unless revoked earlier, cease to operate at the expiration of thirty days from the date on which it is so laid before the House.
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing provisions of this article, the President may, at any time, revoke the Proclamation.

Article 353: Power of the Union to confer powers, etc., on State in certain cases
(1) If the President is satisfied that the security of India or any part of the territory thereof is threatened by war or by internal disturbance, he may, by Proclamation, make provision for the constitution of one or more authorities for the purposes of dealing with the situation.
(2) Any such authority may, in the exercise of the powers conferred on it by the Proclamation, by order,—
(a) confer on any person or authority such powers and authorities as may be necessary for the purpose of dealing with the situation; and
(b) make such incidental and consequential provisions as appear to be necessary or desirable.
(3) A Proclamation issued under this article shall be laid before each House of Parliament and shall cease to have effect on the expiration of a period of six months unless before the expiration of that period it has been approved by resolutions of both Houses of Parliament.

Article 354: Power to promulgate ordinances when both Houses not in session
(1) If at any time, when the Houses of Parliament are not in session, the President is satisfied that circumstances exist which render it necessary for him to take immediate action, he may, by order, promulgate such ordinances as the circumstances may require.
(2) Every ordinance promulgated under this article shall be laid before both Houses of Parliament, as soon as possible after they reassemble.
(3) If any ordinance promulgated under this article is not so laid before both Houses of Parliament, or if both Houses, if sitting, agree in making any modification in the ordinance or in repealing the ordinance, the ordinance shall be deemed to have been revoked at the expiration of fourteen days after the reassembly of the Houses, or, if they are not sitting, at the expiration of fourteen days after the sitting of Parliament commences.

Article 355: Duty of the Union to protect States against external aggression and internal disturbance
It shall be the duty of the Union to protect every State against external aggression and internal disturbance and to ensure that the government of every State is carried on in accordance with the provisions of this Constitution.

Article 356: President's Rule
(1) If the President, on receipt of a report from the Governor of a State or otherwise, is satisfied that a situation has arisen in which the Government of the State cannot be carried on in accordance with the provisions of the Constitution, the President may, by Proclamation, assume to himself all or any of the powers of the Government of the State and make such provisions as he thinks fit for the purpose of ensuring that the Government of the State is carried on in accordance with the provisions of the Constitution.
(2) Any such Proclamation may be made before the expiration of the term of office of the Governor of the State concerned.
(3) A Proclamation made under clause (1) shall be laid before each House of Parliament and shall, unless sooner withdrawn, cease to have effect on the expiration of a period of six months from the date on which it is made: Provided that, if before the expiration of the said period, both Houses of Parliament by resolution extend the operation of the Proclamation, it shall continue in force for such period as may be specified in the resolution.

Article 357: Power of President to give directions to States as to financial matters
(1) If the President is satisfied that a situation has arisen in which the financial stability or credit of India is threatened, he may, by order, direct the State Government concerned to take such steps as he may deem necessary for the purpose of restoring the financial stability or credit of India.
(2) Any such order may provide for—
(a) the giving of directions by the Central Government to the State Government as to the reduction of expenditure, the raising of loans or the increasing of revenue; or
(b) the supersession of any Financial Emergency Provision Committee constituted under article 248A and the assumption by the President of all or any of the powers of that Committee.

Article 358: Power to suspend financial provisions in case of failure to comply with demands for grants
(1) If the House of the People refuses to make any grant in the amount demanded by the President, or if it passes a resolution reducing the amount of any grant so demanded, the President may, by order, suspend the operation of any provision of this Constitution relating to the grants for a period of four months from the date of the order.
(2) If, at the expiration of the period of four months mentioned in clause (1), the House of the People has not made any grant in the amount demanded by the President, or if it has passed a resolution reducing the amount of any grant so demanded, the President may, by order, reduce the amount of any grant so demanded to such amount as he thinks fit.

Article 359: Suspension of Provisions of Article 19 during Emergency
(1) During any period for which the proclamation of Emergency is in operation, the President may, by order, suspend the operation of the provisions of Article 19 in whole or in part in any State or Union territory or in any part thereof.
(2) While any such order is in operation, nothing in Article 19 shall restrict the power of the State to make any law or to take any executive action which the State would be entitled to make or take, if the provisions of Article 19 had been suspended.
(3) In this article, “State” includes the Government of India and the Union territory.

Article 360: Emergency Provisions
(1) If the President is satisfied that a grave emergency exists whereby the security of India or any part of the territory thereof is threatened, whether by war or external aggression or internal disturbance, he may, by Proclamation, declare that a state of emergency exists.
(2) A Proclamation of emergency made under clause (1) shall be laid before each House of Parliament and shall, except where the Houses are sooner dissolved, cease to operate at the expiration of a period of six months from the date of its publication unless before the expiration of that period it has been approved by resolutions of both Houses of Parliament.
(3) Where a Proclamation of emergency is in operation, the President may by order made at any time during the period of the emergency, (a) suspend the operation of any provision of this Constitution relating to any of the matters specified in the Proclamation, (b) make any such provision as he thinks fit for the purpose of adapting the provisions of this Constitution to the situation arising out of the emergency, and any such order shall have the same force and effect as an order made under Article 352.

Article 361: Protection of Certain Fundamental Rights in Certain Cases
(1) Notwithstanding anything in the foregoing provisions of this Part, no person shall be deprived of his life or personal liberty except according to procedure established by law.
(2) No person who is arrested shall be detained in custody without being informed, as soon as may be, of the grounds for such arrest nor shall he be denied the right to consult, and to be defended by, a legal practitioner of his choice.
(3) Every person who is arrested and detained in custody shall be produced before the nearest Magistrate within a period of twenty-four hours of such arrest excluding the time necessary for the journey from the place of arrest to the court of the Magistrate and no such person shall be detained in custody beyond the said period without the authority of a Magistrate.
(4) Nothing in this article shall affect the provisions of any existing law for the detention of any person under preventive detention.

Article 362: Emergency Financial Provisions
(1) If the President is satisfied that a situation has arisen whereby the financial stability or credit of India is threatened, he may, by order, make such provisions as he considers necessary or expedient for the purpose of restoring such stability or credit.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, the President may make provisions for—
(a) requiring all or any of the State Governments to transfer to the Central Government such sums as may be specified in the order; or
(b) giving to the Central Government power to acquire, hold and dispose of any property, movable or immovable, of any State Government.
(3) The provisions made by the President under this article shall have effect notwithstanding anything in any other provision of this Constitution.

Article 363: Emergency Powers
(1) If the President is satisfied that a grave emergency exists whereby the security of India or any part of the territory thereof is threatened, whether by war or external aggression or internal disturbance, he may, by Proclamation, make a declaration to that effect.
(2) A Proclamation issued under clause (1) shall be laid before each House of Parliament and shall, except where the Houses are dissolved, cease to operate at the expiration of a period of six weeks from the date of its publication, unless before the expiration of that period resolutions approving the Proclamation have been passed by both Houses of Parliament.
(3) If both Houses of Parliament do not approve the Proclamation before the expiration of the said period of six weeks, it shall cease to operate at the expiration of that period but shall be revived if and when resolutions approving the Proclamation are passed by both Houses.
(4) While a Proclamation of Emergency is in operation, the President may, by order, make such modifications as he thinks fit in the distribution of powers between the Union and the States.
(5) No Proclamation of Emergency shall be in operation for more than one year without the sanction of Parliament.

Article 364: Contingency Fund of India
(1) There shall be a Contingency Fund of India to be maintained by the Government of India.
(2) The moneys in the Contingency Fund of India shall be appropriated by Parliament by law for the purposes of meeting unforeseen expenditure pending the authorization of such expenditure by Parliament by appropriation in a regular manner.

Article 365: Provisions as to enforcement of Union's laws
(1) If any State fails to comply with, or to carry out, any directions given by the Union under this Constitution, the President may, after such consultation as he deems necessary, by order, direct the State to comply with, or to carry out, the directions.
(2) Any such order may be enforced by any officer of the Union in the State concerned.
(3) The President may, by order, suspend the operation of any provision of a law made by a State in so far as it is inconsistent with any directions given under this article, and the State shall be obliged to take immediate action to bring its law into conformity with such directions.
(4) Nothing in this article shall prevent the President from taking such other action as he deems necessary for the purpose of enforcing any directions given under this article.

Article 366: Definitions
(1) In this Constitution, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “agricultural income” means agricultural income as defined for the purposes of the Income-tax Act, 1961 (43 of 1961);
(b) “annual financial statement” means the Budget Statement referred to in Article 112;
(c) “appropriate legislature” means—(i) in relation to a matter enumerated in the Union List, Parliament;(ii) in relation to a matter enumerated in the State List, the Legislature of the State;(iii) in relation to a matter enumerated in the Concurrent List, either Parliament or the Legislature of the State, as the case may be;
(d) “authorised expenditure” means expenditure which is authorised to be incurred by this Constitution or by any law made by Parliament.        
(2) The words “person” and “property” shall be construed as including respectively any company or association or body of persons, whether incorporated or not.

Article 367: Power of Parliament to modify the Constitution by law
(1) Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, Parliament may by law amend any provision of this Constitution in accordance with the provisions of this article.
(2) An amendment made under this article shall not be called in question in any court of law.
(3) Parliament may, by law, make provision for the amendment of any provision of this Constitution in accordance with the provisions of this article and, where such law provides for the amendment of any provision which, at the commencement of such law, is included in Part III, the law shall also contain a declaration that such amendment is being made in accordance with the provisions of this article.

Article 368: Power of Parliament to amend the Constitution
(1) Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, Parliament may by law made in accordance with the procedure laid down in this article, amend any provision of this Constitution.
(2) An amendment of this Constitution may be made by way of addition, variation or repeal of any provision.
(3) Every amendment of this Constitution made in accordance with the provisions of this article shall be laid before the President who shall give his assent to the same.
(4) No amendment of this Constitution (including an amendment made under clause (2) in its application to any provision of this Constitution) which, in the opinion of the President, makes any change in the basic structure of the Constitution shall be made except by way of a law passed by the special majority.

Article 369: Power to adapt laws to Constitution
(1) Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, Parliament may by law adapt any pre-existing law (including a law made by a Legislature of a State) to the provisions of this Constitution and for that purpose make such modifications in the law as may be necessary or expedient, including provisions for bringing the law into conformity with the provisions of this Constitution.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, Parliament may, by law—
(a) repeal or amend any provision of any pre-existing law which is inconsistent with any provision of this Constitution; (b) make provision for the adaptation and modification of the law of any State to the provisions of this Constitution; (c) provide for the continuance in force of any law, or any part thereof, subject to such modifications or adaptations as may be specified in the law.

Article 370: Special Provisions relating to the State of Jammu and Kashmir
(1) The provisions of this Constitution shall not apply to the State of Jammu and Kashmir with such exceptions and modifications as may be made by the President by order published in the Official Gazette.
(2) Notwithstanding anything in sub-clause (a) of clause (1), the President may, by public notification, declare that this Constitution shall apply to the whole or any part of the State of Jammu and Kashmir with such modifications or adaptations as he may deem necessary.
(3) Any such order may be varied or revoked by a subsequent order made by the President in like manner.
(4) For the purposes of this article, the expression ‘State of Jammu and Kashmir’ includes the territories which, on the 15th day of August, 1947, were comprised in the State of Jammu and Kashmir.

Article 371: Special Provisions relating to certain States
(1) Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, Parliament may by law make provision for the constitution of a committee consisting of members of the House of the People and the Legislative Assembly of the State concerned to advise on the administration of the State in respect of specified matters and the President may, after consultation with the Governor of the State, make regulations specifying the matters in respect of which such advice may be obtained.
(2) Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, the President may, with the consent of the Government of the State concerned, by order direct that any provision of this Constitution relating to any matter shall not apply to the State in so far as it impedes the application of any law made by the Parliament or of any existing law which is for the time being applicable to the State, and any such law may provide for the amendment of any provision of this Constitution in so far as it applies to the State.
(3) Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, Parliament may by law provide for the creation of separate public services for the State and for the reservation of posts in those services for the members of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes in the State.
(4) Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, the President may, with the consent of the Government of the State concerned, by order direct that the provisions of this Constitution relating to the Governor shall, in relation to the State, have effect as if for references to the Governor there were substituted references to the Administrator appointed by the President under this article.
(5) Nothing in this article shall prevent Parliament from making any provision for the amendment of this Constitution in relation to any matter referred to in this article.

Article 372: Continuance of existing laws and their adaptation
(1) Notwithstanding the commencement of this Constitution, but subject to the provisions of this Chapter, all the laws in force in the territory of India immediately before the commencement of this Constitution shall continue in force therein until altered or repealed or amended by a competent Legislature or other authority.
(2) For the purpose of this article, the expression “law” includes any ordinance, order, bye-law, rule, regulation, notification, custom or usage having the force of law in any part of the territory of India.
(3) Nothing in clause (1) shall prevent Parliament from enacting at any time any law with respect to any matter for which provision was made by any law in force in the territory of India immediately before the commencement of this Constitution.
(4) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provisions, nothing in clause (1) shall prevent Parliament from making any law for repealing or amending any law which is in force in the territory of India or any part thereof immediately before the commencement of this Constitution and which is repugnant to any provision of this Constitution.

Article 373: Application of provisions of Constitution to Jammu and Kashmir
(1) Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, the provisions of this Part shall not apply to the State of Jammu and Kashmir.
(2) Nothing in this article shall prevent the application of any other provision of this Constitution to the State of Jammu and Kashmir, if the President by order so directs, and any such order may be made with such restrictions or modifications as the President may deem necessary.

Article 374: Transitional Provisions
(1) Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, the President may, by order, provide for the continued application of all or any of the provisions of the Government of India Act, 1935, for such period, not extending beyond the first day of November, 1950, as he may specify in the order.
(2) Any order made under clause (1) may be varied or revoked by a subsequent order made by the President.
(3) Nothing in this article shall prevent Parliament from making provision for the amendment or repeal of any provision of the Government of India Act, 1935, in so far as it is inconsistent with the provisions of this Constitution.

Article 375: Power of President to authorise expenditure in case of emergency
(1) If the President is satisfied that a situation has arisen whereby the financial stability or credit of India is threatened, he may, by order, authorise the issue of moneys out of the Consolidated Fund of India to meet any expenditure for which provision has not been made by the law.
(2) No such order shall be issued unless the President has consulted the Prime Minister and the Chief Ministers of all the States.
(3) Every order issued under this article shall be laid before Parliament and shall cease to have effect after a period of thirty days from the date on which it is so laid or, if before the expiry of that period resolutions disapproving it are passed by both Houses of Parliament, on the date on which the resolutions are passed.

Article 376: Special Provisions Relating to Certain Offences Against Women
(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), a woman who is subjected to any of the following acts, shall be punished with the punishment provided for the corresponding offence when committed against a woman:—
(a) any of the offences under the Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961 (28 of 1961);
(b) the offence of rape; or
(c) an offence under section 376A, section 376B, section 376C or section 376D of this Code.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), the minimum punishment for the offence of rape shall be ten years, but shall not be less than seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.
(3) Nothing in sub-section (2) shall affect the provisions of section 376A, section 376B, section 376C or section 376D of this Code.

Article 377: Unnatural Offences
(1) Whoever voluntarily has carnal intercourse against the order of nature with any man, woman or animal shall be punished with imprisonment for life, or with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
(2) Nothing in this section shall extend to any act of sexual intercourse between husband and wife, the wife being a consenting party.

Article 378: Application of provisions of this Constitution to Jammu and Kashmir
(1) Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, the provisions of this Part shall not be applicable to the State of Jammu and Kashmir.
(2) Parliament may by law extend to the State of Jammu and Kashmir any provision of this Constitution other than those referred to in clause (1) with such modifications or adaptation as may be specified in the law and subject to such conditions as may be specified therein.
(3) Any such law as is referred to in clause (2) shall be passed by Parliament only with the concurrence of the Government of the State of Jammu and Kashmir.

Article 379: Continuance in force of existing laws and their adaptation
(1) Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, all laws in force in the territory of India immediately before the commencement of this Constitution shall continue in force therein until altered or repealed or amended by a competent Legislature or other authority.
(2) For the purpose of adapting the existing laws to the provisions of this Constitution, Parliament may by law make such adaptations and modifications in those laws as may be necessary.

Article 380: Application of provisions of the Constitution to the States
(1) The provisions of this Constitution, other than the provisions of Part III, shall, subject to the provisions of this article, apply to every State.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provision, the provisions of this Constitution relating to—
(a) the executive power of the State; (b) the judiciary;(c) the distribution of legislative powers between the Union and the States; (d) the procedure for the amendment of this Constitution; (e) the property of the State; (f) contracts made by the State; (g) the borrowing of money by the State; (h) the giving of grants by the Union to the States, and the conditions on which such grants are to be made, shall apply in the case of every State.
(3) The provisions of this article shall not apply to the State of Jammu and Kashmir.

Article 381: Suits against the Government of India
(1) No suit shall be instituted against the Government of India or any of its officers in respect of any act done in the discharge of his official duty except with the consent of the President.
(2) No such suit shall be instituted after the expiration of two years from the date on which the cause of action arose.

Article 382: Power of President to make during recess grants for urgent expenditure
(1) If, in the opinion of the President, there is an urgent need to make any grant for the services of the Union for any period during which the House of the People is not in session, he may make a grant for such period out of the Consolidated Fund of India.
(2) Every such grant shall be made by an order made by the President and shall be deemed to be a charge on the Consolidated Fund of India.
(3) No such order shall be made unless a statement of the reasons for the grant and the amount of the grant has been laid before the House of the People.

Article 383: Power of President to adapt laws to circumstances arising out of Proclamation of Emergency
(1) If a Proclamation of Emergency is in operation, the President may, by order, make such adaptations of any law as he may deem necessary or expedient for the purpose of adapting the law to the circumstances arising out of the Proclamation.
(2) Any order made under clause (1) shall have the same force and effect as if it were a law made by Parliament.

Article 384: Extortion
Whoever, by putting any person in fear of injury, wrongful confinement, or the death of any person, or of any of his relations, or by threatening to publish any defamatory matter, or by any other means, intentionally extorts from any person, any property or valuable security, or any confession or admission, is said to commit extortion.

Article 385: Appropriation of Moneys for Certain Purposes
(1) Notwithstanding anything in Article 114, Parliament may, by law, authorise the President to make any appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated Fund of India for the purpose of meeting any unforeseen expenditure, which is necessary for the services of the Union in the event of an emergency, that is to say, a situation arising out of war or external aggression or internal disturbance.
(2) No law made in pursuance of clause (1) shall be passed after the expiry of a period of two years from the commencement of that clause.

Article 386: Extortion by putting a person in fear of death or grievous hurt
(1) Whoever commits extortion by putting any person in fear of death or of grievous hurt, or of the death or grievous hurt of any other person, or in fear of any injury to property, or in fear of any other injury, commits the offence of extortion.

Article 387: Special provision as to determination of population for the purposes of certain elections
(1) If the President is satisfied that it is necessary or expedient in the public interest so to do, he may by order direct that the population of any State specified in the order shall, for the purposes of any election to the House of the People or to the Legislative Assembly of such State, be determined in such manner as he may specify in the order.
(2) An order made under clause (1) shall be laid before each House of Parliament and shall be subject to such modifications as Parliament may by law make.

Article 388: Provisions as to the filling of casual vacancies in the provisional Parliament and provisional Legislatures of the States (Omitted)

Article 389: Power of President to promulgate Ordinances during recess of Parliament
(1) If at any time, except when both Houses of Parliament are in session, the President is satisfied that circumstances exist which render it necessary for him to take immediate action, he may, by Proclamation, make any such provision as he considers necessary or expedient for the purpose of dealing with the situation.
(2) Any such Proclamation may be varied or revoked by a subsequent Proclamation.
(3) Every Proclamation under this article shall, as soon as may be after it is made, be laid before both Houses of Parliament.
(4) If both Houses of Parliament approve the Proclamation, it shall continue in force for such period as may be specified in the Proclamation; but if they do not approve the Proclamation, it shall cease to operate at the expiration of a period of six weeks from the date on which it is laid before them.

Article 390: Continuance of Existing Laws and Notifications
(1) Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, all laws in force in the territory of India immediately before the commencement of this Constitution, insofar as they are not inconsistent with the provisions of this Constitution, shall continue in force until altered or repealed or amended by a competent Legislature or other authority.
(2) All notifications issued by the Governor-General or any other authority under any law in force in the territory of India immediately before the commencement of this Constitution shall, insofar as they are not inconsistent with the provisions of this Constitution, continue in force until revoked or amended by a competent authority.

Article 391: Validation of certain Acts and Regulations
(1) Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, any Central Act or Regulation made before the commencement of this Constitution shall, in so far as it is inconsistent with any provision of this Constitution, continue in force until altered or repealed or amended by a competent Legislature or other authority.
(2) In this article, "competent Legislature" means Parliament or the Legislature of a State as the case may be.

Article 392: Power of Parliament to make alterations in the Constitution
(1) Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, Parliament may by law amend any provision of this Constitution in accordance with the provisions of this Article.
(2) An amendment of this Constitution may be made by way of a Bill which, when passed by each House of Parliament with an absolute majority of the members present and voting, shall be presented to the President for his assent.
(3) If the President withholds his assent to a Bill for an amendment of this Constitution, the Bill shall again be presented to the Houses of Parliament in session assembled in two successive sessions, and if it is passed by each House with an absolute majority of the members present and voting in each such session, it shall be presented to the President for his assent and the President shall not withhold assent to the Bill.

Article 393: Short title
This Constitution may be called the Constitution of India.

Article 394: Authoritative Text in Hindi
(1) The President shall cause an authoritative translation of this Constitution in the Hindi language, both in Devanagari and Roman scripts, to be published.
(2) The authoritative translation of this Constitution in the Hindi language shall be deemed to be the text thereof in the Hindi language for all purposes.

Article 395: Repeals
(1) The Indian Independence Act, 1947, and the Government of India Act, 1935, together with all enactments amending or supplementing the latter Act, but not including the Abolition of Privy Council Jurisdiction Act, 1949, are hereby repealed.
(2) Any reference in any other law to any enactment repealed by this article shall be construed as a reference to the corresponding provision of this Constitution.

Article 396: Dacoity with Murder
(1) If any one of five or more persons, who are conjointly committing dacoity, commits murder in so committing dacoity, every one of those persons shall be punished with death, or imprisonment for life, or rigorous imprisonment for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
(2) Where a person is convicted of an offence under this article, the court may, if it thinks fit, order that the property, if any, used in the commission of the offence shall be forfeited to the State.

Article 397: Power of President to adapt laws (1) If at any time it appears to the President that it is necessary or expedient in the public interest so to do, he may by order make such adaptations and modifications of any Act of Parliament as may be necessary or expedient for the purpose of bringing the law into accord with the provisions of this Constitution. (2) No such order shall be made unless a draft of the order has been laid before each House of Parliament and the Houses have been allowed a reasonable opportunity of considering the draft.

Article 398: Application of provisions of this Chapter to expenditure charged on the Consolidated Fund of India
(1) The provisions of this Chapter shall not apply to any expenditure charged on the Consolidated Fund of India.
(2) No demand for a grant for any expenditure charged on the Consolidated Fund of India shall be made in Parliament.
(3) No discussion shall take place in Parliament with respect to any such expenditure.

Article 399: Making Preparation to Commit Dacoity
Whoever makes any preparation for committing dacoity, shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.

Article 400: Power of President to promulgate Ordinances during recess of Parliament
(1) If at any time, except when both Houses of Parliament are sitting, the President is satisfied that circumstances exist which render it necessary for him to take immediate action, he may, by Proclamation, make such provisions as he deems necessary for the purpose.
(2) Every such Proclamation shall be laid before Parliament as soon as possible after it is issued, and shall be subject to annulment by Parliament.
(3) Notwithstanding anything in the foregoing provisions of this article, a Proclamation issued under this article shall cease to have effect at the expiration of six weeks from the date of its issue, unless before the expiration of that period it has been approved by resolutions of both Houses of Parliament.

Article 401: Custody of the Consolidated Funds, Contingency Fund and moneys credited to the public accounts
(1) The custody of the Consolidated Fund of India, the Contingency Fund of India and all other moneys credited to the public accounts of the Union shall be entrusted to such person or persons as the President may direct or authorise.
(2) No moneys out of the Consolidated Fund of India or the Contingency Fund of India shall be appropriated except in accordance with law and for the purposes and in the manner provided in this Constitution.
(3) No moneys shall be withdrawn from the Consolidated Fund of India except under appropriation made by law passed in accordance with the provisions of this Constitution.
(4) No moneys shall be withdrawn from the Contingency Fund of India except to meet unforeseen expenditure, pending authorisation of such expenditure by Parliament by law under article 115.

Article 402: Annual financial statement
(1) The President shall in respect of every financial year cause to be laid before both the Houses of Parliament a statement of the estimated receipts and expenditure of the Government of India for that year, in this Part referred to as the annual financial statement.
(2) The estimates of expenditure embodied in the annual financial statement shall show separately—
(a) the sums required to meet expenditure described by this Constitution as expenditure charged upon the Consolidated Fund of India; and
(b) the sums required to meet other expenditure proposed to be made from the Consolidated Fund of India, and shall distinguish expenditure on revenue account from other expenditure.
(3) The following expenditure shall be expenditure charged on the Consolidated Fund of India—
(a) the emoluments and allowances of the President and other expenditure relating to his office;
(b) the salaries and allowances of the Chairman and the Deputy Chairman of the Council of States and the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker of the House of the People;
(c) debt charges for which the Government of India is liable including interest, sinking fund charges and redemption charges, and other expenditure relating to the raising of loans and the service and redemption of debt;
(d) the salaries, allowances and pensions payable to or in respect of Judges of the Supreme Court;
(e) the pensions payable to or in respect of Judges of any High Court;
(f) the salaries, allowances and pensions payable to or in respect of the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India;
(g) any sums required to satisfy any judgment, decree or award of any court or arbitral tribunal;
(h) any other expenditure declared by this Constitution or by Parliament by law to be so charged.

Article 403: Custody, etc., of Consolidated Funds, Contingency Funds and moneys credited to the public accounts of the States
(1) The custody of the Consolidated Fund of a State, the Contingency Fund of a State and all other moneys credited to the public accounts of a State shall be entrusted to such person or persons as the Governor may direct or authorise.
(2) No moneys out of the Consolidated Fund of a State or the Contingency Fund of a State shall be appropriated except in accordance with law and for the purposes and in the manner provided in this Constitution.
(3) No moneys shall be withdrawn from the Consolidated Fund of a State except under appropriation made by law passed in accordance with the provisions of this Constitution.
(4) No moneys shall be withdrawn from the Contingency Fund of a State except to meet unforeseen expenditure pending authorisation of such expenditure by the Legislature of the State by law under article 206.

Article 404: Withdrawals from Consolidated Fund of India
No moneys out of the Consolidated Fund of India shall be withdrawn except in accordance with law and for the purposes and in the manner provided in this Constitution.

Article 405: Custody, etc., of Consolidated Funds, Contingency Funds and moneys credited to the public accounts of the Union and of the States
(1) The custody of the Consolidated Fund of India, the Contingency Fund of India, the Public Account of India and all other moneys credited to the public accounts of the Union shall be entrusted to such person or persons as the President may direct or authorise.
(2) The custody of the Consolidated Fund of a State, the Contingency Fund of a State, the Public Account of a State and all other moneys credited to the public accounts of the State shall be entrusted to such person or persons as the Governor may direct or authorise.

Article 406: Appropriation Bills
(1) As soon as may be after the grants under article 405 have been made by the House of the People, there shall be introduced a Bill to provide for the appropriation out of the Consolidated Fund of India of all moneys required to meet—
(a) the grants so made by the House of the People; and
(b) the expenditure charged on the Consolidated Fund of India but not exceeding in any case the amount shown in the statement previously laid before Parliament.
(2) No amendment shall be proposed to any such Bill in either House of Parliament which will have the effect of varying the amount or altering the destination of any grant so made or of varying the amount of any expenditure charged on the Consolidated Fund of India, and the decision of the person presiding as to whether an amendment is admissible under this clause shall be final.

Article 407: Money Bills
(1) A Bill shall be deemed to be a Money Bill if it contains only provisions dealing with all or any of the following matters, namely:
(a) the imposition, abolition, remission, alteration or regulation of any tax;
(b) the regulation of the borrowing of money or the giving of any guarantee by the Government of India, or the amendment of the law with respect to any financial obligations undertaken or to be undertaken by the Government of India;
(c) the custody of the Consolidated Fund or the Contingency Fund of India, the payment of moneys into or the withdrawal of moneys from any such Fund;
(d) the appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated Fund of India;
(e) the declaring of any expenditure to be expenditure charged on the Consolidated Fund of India or the increasing of the amount of any such expenditure;
(f) the receipt of money on account of the Consolidated Fund of India or the public account of India or the custody or issue of such money or the audit of the accounts of the Union or of a State; or
(g) any matter incidental to any of the matters specified in sub-clauses (a) to (f).
(2) A Bill shall not be deemed to be a Money Bill by reason only that it provides for the imposition of fines or other pecuniary penalties, or for the demand or payment of fees for licences or fees for services rendered, or by reason that it provides for the imposition, abolition, remission, alteration or regulation of any tax by any local authority or body for local purposes.

Article 408: Power of the President to promulgate Ordinances during recess of Parliament
(1) If at any time, except when both Houses of Parliament are in session, the President is satisfied that circumstances exist which render it necessary for him to take immediate action, he may promulgate such Ordinance as the circumstances appear to him to require.
(2) An Ordinance promulgated under this article shall have the same force and effect as an Act of Parliament, but every such Ordinance—
(a) shall be laid before both Houses of Parliament and shall cease to operate at the expiration of six weeks from the reassembly of Parliament, or, if before the expiration of that period resolutions disapproving it are passed by both Houses, upon the passing of the second of those resolutions; and
(b) may be withdrawn at any time by the President.

Article 409: Annual financial statement
(1) The President shall in respect of every financial year cause to be laid before both the Houses of Parliament a statement of the estimated receipts and expenditure of the Government of India for that year, in this Part referred to as the annual financial statement.
(2) The estimates of expenditure embodied in the annual financial statement shall show separately—
(a) the sums required to meet expenditure described by this Constitution as expenditure charged upon the Consolidated Fund of India; and
(b) the sums required to meet other expenditure proposed to be made from the Consolidated Fund of India, and shall distinguish expenditure on revenue account from other expenditure.
(3) The following expenditure shall be expenditure charged on the Consolidated Fund of India—
(a) the emoluments and allowances of the President and other expenditure relating to his office;
(b) the salaries and allowances of the Chairman and the Deputy Chairman of the Council of States and the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker of the House of the People;
(c) debt charges for which the Government of India is liable including interest, sinking fund charges and redemption charges, and other expenditure relating to the raising of loans and the service and redemption of debt;
(d) the salaries, allowances and pensions payable to or in respect of Judges of the Supreme Court;
(e) the pensions payable to or in respect of Judges of any High Court;
(f) the salaries, allowances and pensions payable to or in respect of the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India;
(g) any sums required to satisfy any judgment, decree or award of any court or arbitral tribunal;
(h) any other expenditure declared by this Constitution or by Parliament by law to be so charged.

Article 410: Rules of procedure
(1) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, each House of Parliament may make rules for regulating, subject to the provisions of this Constitution, its procedure and the conduct of its business.
(2) Until rules are made under clause (1), the rules of procedure and standing orders in force immediately before the commencement of this Constitution with respect to the Legislature of the Dominion of India shall have effect in relation to the Houses of Parliament subject to such modifications and adaptations as may be made therein by the Chairman of the Council of States or the Speaker of the House of the People, as the case may be.

Article 411: Annual financial statement and the Appropriation Bill not to be submitted to vote
The annual financial statement and the Appropriation Bill shall not be submitted to the vote of Parliament or any House thereof.

Article 412: Annual financial statement
(1) The President shall in respect of every financial year cause to be laid before both Houses of Parliament a statement of the estimated receipts and expenditure of the Government of India for that year, in this Part referred to as the annual financial statement.
(2) The estimates of expenditure embodied in the annual financial statement shall show separately—
(a) the sums required to meet expenditure described by this Constitution as expenditure charged upon the Consolidated Fund of India; and
(b) the sums required to meet other expenditure proposed to be made from the Consolidated Fund of India, and shall distinguish expenditure on revenue account from other expenditure.

Article 413: Contingency Fund of India
(1) Parliament may by law establish a Contingency Fund in the nature of an imprest to be entitled the Contingency Fund of India into which shall be paid from time to time such sums as may be determined by such law, and the said Fund shall be placed at the disposal of the President to enable advances to be made by him out of such Fund for the purposes of meeting unforeseen expenditure pending authorisation of such expenditure by Parliament:
Provided that there shall be laid before both Houses of Parliament any amount expended from the Fund together with the circumstances leading to such expenditure.
(2) The advances made from the Contingency Fund of India shall be subsequently recouped by amounts voted by Parliament.

Article 414: Supplementary, additional or excess grants
(1) The President shall cause to be laid before both Houses of Parliament for every financial year a statement of the estimated receipts and expenditure of the Government of India for that year, in this Part referred to as the annual financial statement.
(2) The estimates of expenditure embodied in the annual financial statement shall show separately—
(a) the sums required to meet expenditure described by this Constitution as expenditure charged upon the Consolidated Fund of India; and
(b) the sums required to meet other expenditure proposed to be made from the Consolidated Fund of India, and shall distinguish expenditure on revenue account from other expenditure.

Article 415: Vote on Account
(1) Notwithstanding anything in the foregoing provisions of this Chapter, the House of the People shall have power—
(a) to make any grant in advance in respect of the estimated expenditure for a part of any financial year pending the completion of the procedure prescribed in article 113 for the voting of such grant and the passing of the law in accordance with the provisions of article 114 in relation to that expenditure; and
(b) to make a grant for meeting an unexpected demand upon the resources of India when on account of the magnitude or the indefinite character of the service the demand cannot be stated with the details ordinarily given in an annual financial statement.
(2) The provisions of articles 112, 113 and 114 shall have effect in relation to the making of any grant under clause (1) and to any law to be made under that clause as they have effect in relation to the making of a grant with regard to any expenditure mentioned in the annual financial statement and the law to be made for the authorisation of appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated Fund of India to meet such expenditure.

Article 416: Supplementary, additional or excess grants
(1) The President shall cause to be laid before both Houses of Parliament any estimate supplementary, additional or excess expenditure, if any, required to be made from the Consolidated Fund of India in respect of every financial year.
(2) The provisions of articles 112, 113 and 114 shall have effect in relation to the making of any grant under clause (1) and to any law to be made under that clause as they have effect in relation to the making of a grant with regard to any expenditure mentioned in the annual financial statement and the law to be made for the authorisation of appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated Fund of India to meet such expenditure.

Article 417: Contingency Fund of India
(1) Parliament may by law establish a Contingency Fund in the nature of an imprest to be entitled the Contingency Fund of India into which shall be paid from time to time such sums as may be determined by such law, and the said Fund shall be placed at the disposal of the President to enable advances to be made by him out of such Fund for the purposes of meeting unforeseen expenditure pending authorisation of such expenditure by Parliament:
Provided that there shall be laid before both Houses of Parliament any amount expended from the Fund together with the circumstances leading to such expenditure.
(2) The provisions of articles 112, 113 and 114 shall have effect in relation to the making of any grant under clause (1) and to any law to be made under that clause as they have effect in relation to the making of a grant with regard to any expenditure mentioned in the annual financial statement and the law to be made for the authorisation of appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated Fund of India to meet such expenditure.

Article 418: Power of the President to promulgate Ordinances during recess of Parliament
(1) If at any time, except when both Houses of Parliament are in session, the President is satisfied that circumstances exist which render it necessary for him to take immediate action, he may promulgate such Ordinance as the circumstances appear to him to require.
(2) An Ordinance promulgated under this article shall have the same force and effect as an Act of Parliament, but every such Ordinance—
(a) shall be laid before both Houses of Parliament and shall cease to operate at the expiration of six weeks from the reassembly of Parliament, or, if before the expiration of that period resolutions disapproving it are passed by both Houses, upon the passing of the second of those resolutions; and
(b) may be withdrawn at any time by the President.

Article 419: Special provisions as to financial Bills
(1) A Bill or amendment making provision for any of the matters specified in sub-clauses (a) to (f) of clause (1) of article 110 shall not be introduced or moved except on the of the President and a Bill making such provision shall not be introduced in the Council of States:
Provided that no shall be required under this clause for the moving of an amendment making provision for the reduction or abolition of any tax.
(2) A Bill or amendment shall not be deemed to make provision for any of the matters aforesaid by reason only that it provides for the imposition of fines or other pecuniary penalties, or for the demand or payment of fees for licences or fees for services rendered, or by reason that it provides for the imposition, abolition, remission, alteration or regulation of any tax by any local authority or body for local purposes.

Article 420: Annual financial statement
(1) The President shall in respect of every financial year cause to be laid before both the Houses of Parliament a statement of the estimated receipts and expenditure of the Government of India for that year, in this Part referred to as the annual financial statement.
(2) The estimates of expenditure embodied in the annual financial statement shall show separately—
(a) the sums required to meet expenditure described by this Constitution as expenditure charged upon the Consolidated Fund of India; and
(b) the sums required to meet other expenditure proposed to be made from the Consolidated Fund of India, and shall distinguish expenditure on revenue account from other expenditure.

Article 421: Power of President to grant pardons, etc., and to suspend, remit or commute sentences in certain cases
(1) The President shall have the power to grant pardons, reprieves, respites or remissions of punishment or to suspend, remit or commute the sentence of any person convicted of any offence—
(a) in all cases where the punishment or sentence is by a Court Martial;
(b) in all cases where the punishment or sentence is for an offence against any law relating to a matter to which the executive power of the Union extends;
(c) in all cases where the sentence is a sentence of death.
(2) Nothing in sub-clause (a) of clause (1) shall affect the power conferred by law on any officer of the Armed Forces of the Union to suspend, remit or commute a sentence passed by a Court Martial.

Article 422: Power of President to grant pardons, etc., and to suspend, remit or commute sentences in certain cases
(1) The President shall have the power to grant pardons, reprieves, respites or remissions of punishment or to suspend, remit or commute the sentence of any person convicted of any offence—
(a) in all cases where the punishment or sentence is by a Court Martial;
(b) in all cases where the punishment or sentence is for an offence against any law relating to a matter to which the executive power of the Union extends;
(c) in all cases where the sentence is a sentence of death.
(2) Nothing in sub-clause (a) of clause (1) shall affect the power conferred by law on any officer of the Armed Forces of the Union to suspend, remit or commute a sentence passed by a Court Martial.

Article 423: Power of President to grant pardons, etc., and to suspend, remit or commute sentences in certain cases
(1) The President shall have the power to grant pardons, reprieves, respites or remissions of punishment or to suspend, remit or commute the sentence of any person convicted of any offence—
(a) in all cases where the punishment or sentence is by a Court Martial;
(b) in all cases where the punishment or sentence is for an offence against any law relating to a matter to which the executive power of the Union extends;
(c) in all cases where the sentence is a sentence of death.
(2) Nothing in sub-clause (a) of clause (1) shall affect the power conferred by law on any officer of the Armed Forces of the Union to suspend, remit or commute a sentence passed by a Court Martial.

Article 424: Annual financial statement
(1) The President shall in respect of every financial year cause to be laid before both the Houses of Parliament a statement of the estimated receipts and expenditure of the Government of India for that year, in this Part referred to as the “annual financial statement”.
(2) The estimates of expenditure embodied in the annual financial statement shall show separately—
(a) the sums required to meet expenditure described by this Constitution as expenditure charged upon the Consolidated Fund of India; and
(b) the sums required to meet other expenditure proposed to be made from the Consolidated Fund of India, and shall distinguish expenditure on revenue account from other expenditure.
(3) The following expenditure shall be expenditure charged on the Consolidated Fund of India—
(a) the emoluments and allowances of the President and other expenditure relating to his office;
(b) the salaries and allowances of the Chairman and the Deputy Chairman of the Council of States and the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker of the House of the People;
(c) debt charges for which the Government of India is liable including interest, sinking fund charges and redemption charges, and other expenditure relating to the raising of loans and the service and redemption of debt;

Article 425: Supplementary, additional or excess grants
(1) The President shall cause to be laid before both the Houses of Parliament for every financial year a statement of the estimated amount of supplementary, additional or excess grants that he may be called upon to recommend during the course of that year.
(2) The provisions of articles 113 and 114 shall have effect in relation to the statement so laid before the Houses of Parliament under clause (1) as they have effect in relation to the annual financial statement referred to in article 114.

Article 426: Votes on account, votes of credit and exceptional grants
(1) Notwithstanding anything in the foregoing provisions of this Chapter, the House of the People shall have power—
(a) to make any grant in advance in respect of the estimated expenditure for a part of any financial year pending the completion of the procedure prescribed in article 113 for the voting of such grant and the passing of the law in accordance with the provisions of article 114 in relation to that expenditure;
(b) to make a grant for meeting an unexpected demand upon the resources of India when on account of the magnitude or the indefinite character of the service the demand cannot be stated with the details ordinarily given in an annual financial statement;
(c) to make an exceptional grant which forms no part of the current service of any financial year; and
(d) to make any grant for the purpose of enabling advances to be made out of the Consolidated Fund of India.
(2) The provisions of articles 113 and 114 shall have effect in relation to the making of any grant under clause (1) and to any law to be made under that clause as they have effect in relation to the making of a grant with regard to any expenditure mentioned in the annual financial statement and the law to be made for the authorization of appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated Fund of India to meet such expenditure.

Article 427: Contingency Fund of India
(1) Parliament may by law establish a Contingency Fund in the nature of an imprest to be entitled the Contingency Fund of India into which shall be paid from time to time such sums as may be determined by such law, and the said Fund shall be placed at the disposal of the President to enable advances to be made by him out of such Fund for the purposes of meeting unforeseen expenditure pending authorisation of such expenditure by Parliament:
Provided that there shall be laid before both the Houses of Parliament any expenditure so made as soon as may be after the making of such expenditure.
(2) The provisions of articles 114 and 115 shall have effect in relation to the Contingency Fund of India as they have effect in relation to the Consolidated Fund of India.

Article 428: Annual financial statement
(1) The President shall in respect of every financial year cause to be laid before both the Houses of Parliament a statement of the estimated receipts and expenditure of the Government of India for that year, in this Part referred to as the annual financial statement.
(2) The estimates of expenditure embodied in the annual financial statement shall show separately—
(a) the sums required to meet expenditure described by this Constitution as expenditure charged upon the Consolidated Fund of India; and
(b) the sums required to meet other expenditure proposed to be made from the Consolidated Fund of India, and shall distinguish expenditure on revenue account from other expenditure.
(3) The following expenditure shall be expenditure charged on the Consolidated Fund of India—
(a) the emoluments and allowances of the President and other expenditure relating to his office;
(b) the salaries and allowances of the Chairman and the Deputy Chairman of the Council of States and the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker of the House of the People;
(c) debt charges for which the Government of India is liable including interest, sinking fund charges and redemption charges, and other expenditure relating to the raising of loans and the service and redemption of debt;

Article 429: Votes on account, votes of credit and exceptional grants
(1) Notwithstanding anything in the foregoing provisions of this Chapter, the House of the People shall have power—
(a) to make any grant in advance in respect of the estimated expenditure for a part of any financial year pending the completion of the procedure prescribed in article 113 for the voting of such grant and the passing of the law in accordance with the provisions of article 114 in relation to that expenditure;
(b) to make a grant for meeting an unexpected demand upon the resources of India when on account of the magnitude or the indefinite character of the service the demand cannot be stated with the details ordinarily given in an annual financial statement;
(c) to make an exceptional grant which forms no part of the current service of any financial year; and
(d) to make any grant for an expenditure charged on the Consolidated Fund of India, but not exceeding in amount the sum so charged for the preceding financial year.

Article 430: Transitional provisions
(1) Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, as from the appointed day—
(a) all property and assets which immediately before that day were vested in His Majesty for the purposes of the Government of India or of any State shall vest in the Union or, as the case may be, in the successor State;
(b) all rights, liabilities and obligations of the Government of India or of any State, whether arising out of any contract or otherwise, shall be the rights, liabilities and obligations of the Government of India or, as the case may be, of the successor State;
(c) all suits and other legal proceedings instituted or which could have been instituted by or against the Government of India or any State immediately before that day may be continued or may be instituted by or against the Government of India or, as the case may be, the successor State;
(d) all matters in the Concurrent List which immediately before that day were regulated by Parliament alone shall be regulated by Parliament and the Legislature of every successor State;
(e) all matters other than those referred to in clause (d) which immediately before that day were regulated by the Legislature of any State alone shall be regulated by the Legislature of the successor State alone;
(f) any reference in the Constitution to the Governor of a State shall, in relation to any area within the territory of India which on the appointed day is transferred from one State to another, be construed as a reference to the Governor or Rajpramukh of the successor State.
(2) In this article, the expression "appointed day" means the date on which the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, comes into force.

Article 431: Power of President to make regulations for certain Union territories
(1) The President may, with respect to any Union territory or part thereof, by public notification, make regulations for the peace, progress and good government of the territory or part thereof, and any regulation so made may repeal or amend any Act of Parliament or any other law which is for the time being applicable to that territory or part thereof.
(2) Any regulation so made may contain such incidental and consequential provisions as appear to the President to be necessary or desirable for giving effect to the purposes of the regulation.
(3) All regulations made under this article shall be laid before Parliament, and shall be subject to such modifications, whether by way of repeal or amendment, as Parliament may make during the session in which they are so laid.

Article 432: Power of President to promulgate Ordinances during recess of Parliament
(1) If at any time, except when both Houses of Parliament are in session, the President is satisfied that circumstances exist which render it necessary for him to take immediate action, he may promulgate such Ordinance as the circumstances appear to him to require.
(2) An Ordinance promulgated under this article shall have the same force and effect as an Act of Parliament, but every such Ordinance—
(a) shall be laid before both Houses of Parliament and shall cease to operate at the expiration of six weeks from the reassembly of Parliament, or, if before the expiration of that period resolutions disapproving it are passed by both Houses, upon the passing of the second of those resolutions; and
(b) may be withdrawn at any time by the President.

Article 433: Power of President to promulgate Ordinances during recess of State Legislature
(1) If at any time, except when the Legislative Assembly of a State is in session, or where there is a Legislative Council in a State, except when both Houses of the Legislature are in session, the Governor is satisfied that circumstances exist which render it necessary for him to take immediate action, he may promulgate such Ordinance as the circumstances appear to him to require.
(2) An Ordinance promulgated under this article shall have the same force and effect as an Act of the Legislature of the State assented to by the Governor, but every such Ordinance—
(a) shall be laid before the Legislative Assembly of the State, or where there is a Legislative Council in the State, before both Houses, and shall cease to operate at the expiration of six weeks from the reassembly of the Legislature, or if before the expiration of that period resolutions disapproving it are passed by both Houses, upon the passing of the second of those resolutions; and
(b) may be withdrawn at any time by the Governor.

Article 434: Power of President to promulgate Ordinances when both Houses of Parliament are dissolved
(1) If at any time, except when both Houses of Parliament are in session, the President is satisfied that circumstances exist which render it necessary for him to take immediate action, he may promulgate such Ordinance as the circumstances appear to him to require.
(2) An Ordinance promulgated under this article shall have the same force and effect as an Act of Parliament, but every such Ordinance—
(a) shall be laid before both Houses of Parliament and shall cease to operate at the expiration of six weeks from the reassembly of Parliament, or, if before the expiration of that period resolutions disapproving it are passed by both Houses, upon the passing of the second of those resolutions; and
(b) may be withdrawn at any time by the President.

Article 435: Power of President to promulgate Ordinances during recess of Parliament
(1) If at any time, except when both Houses of Parliament are in session, the President is satisfied that circumstances exist which render it necessary for him to take immediate action, he may promulgate such Ordinance as the circumstances appear to him to require.
(2) An Ordinance promulgated under this article shall have the same force and effect as an Act of Parliament, but every such Ordinance—
(a) shall be laid before both Houses of Parliament and shall cease to operate at the expiration of six weeks from the reassembly of Parliament, or, if before the expiration of that period resolutions disapproving it are passed by both Houses, upon the passing of the second of those resolutions; and
(b) may be withdrawn at any time by the President.

Article 436: Special provisions as to financial Bills
(1) A Bill or amendment making provision for any of the matters specified in sub-clauses (a) to (f) of clause (1) of article 110 shall not be introduced or moved except on the of the President and a Bill making such provision shall not be introduced in the Council of States:
Provided that no shall be required under this clause for the moving of an amendment making provision for the reduction or abolition of any tax.
(2) A Bill or amendment shall not be deemed to make provision for any of the matters aforesaid by reason only that it provides for the imposition of fines or other pecuniary penalties, or for the demand or payment of fees for licences or fees for services rendered, or by reason that it provides for the imposition, abolition, remission, alteration or regulation of any tax by any local authority or body for local purposes.

Article 437: Power of President to promulgate Ordinances during recess of State Legislature
(1) If at any time, except when the Legislative Assembly of a State is in session, or where there is a Legislative Council in a State, except when both Houses are in session, the Governor is satisfied that circumstances exist which render it necessary for him to take immediate action, he may promulgate such Ordinance as the circumstances appear to him to require.
(2) An Ordinance promulgated under this article shall have the same force and effect as an Act of the Legislature of the State assented to by the Governor, but every such Ordinance—
(a) shall be laid before the Legislative Assembly of the State, or where there is a Legislative Council in the State, before both the Houses, and shall cease to operate at the expiration of six weeks from the reassembly of the Legislature, or if before the expiration of that period resolutions disapproving it are passed by both Houses, upon the passing of the second of those resolutions; and
(b) may be withdrawn at any time by the Governor.

Article 438: Validation of certain Acts and Regulations
(1) Notwithstanding any judgment, decree or order of any court, tribunal or other authority, all acts done by the President or the Governor or any person acting under the authority of the President or the Governor in the exercise of his functions shall be deemed to have been done in accordance with law.
(2) No law made by the Legislature of a State shall be deemed to be invalid on the ground that it makes provision with respect to any matter with respect to which Parliament has no power to make laws, if it has received the assent of the President.
(3) In this article, "law" includes any Ordinance, order, bye-law, rule, regulation, notification, custom or usage having in the territory of India the force of law.

Article 439: Special provisions as to financial Bills
(1) A Bill or amendment making provision for any of the matters specified in sub-clauses (a) to (f) of clause (1) of article 110 shall not be introduced or moved except on the of the President and a Bill making such provision shall not be introduced in a State Legislature except on the recommendation of the Governor.
(2) A Bill or amendment shall not be deemed to make provision for any of the matters aforesaid by reason only that it provides for the imposition of fines or other pecuniary penalties, or for the demand or payment of fees for licences or fees for services rendered, or by reason that it provides for the imposition, abolition, remission, alteration or regulation of any tax by any local authority or body for local purposes.

Article 440: Annual financial statement
(1) The President shall in respect of every financial year cause to be laid before both the Houses of Parliament a statement of the estimated receipts and expenditure of the Government of India for that year, in this Part referred to as the "annual financial statement".
(2) The estimates of expenditure embodied in the annual financial statement shall show separately—
(a) the sums required to meet expenditure described by this Constitution as expenditure charged upon the Consolidated Fund of India; and
(b) the sums required to meet other expenditure proposed to be made from the Consolidated Fund of India, and shall distinguish expenditure on revenue account from other expenditure.

Article 441: Supplementary, additional or excess grants
(1) The President shall cause to be laid before both the Houses of Parliament for every financial year a statement of the estimated receipts and expenditure of the Government of India for that year, in this Part referred to as the "annual financial statement".
(2) The estimates of expenditure embodied in the annual financial statement shall show separately—
(a) the sums required to meet expenditure described by this Constitution as expenditure charged upon the Consolidated Fund of India; and
(b) the sums required to meet other expenditure proposed to be made from the Consolidated Fund of India, and shall distinguish expenditure on revenue account from other expenditure.

Article 442: Vote on account
(1) Notwithstanding anything in the foregoing provisions of this Chapter, the House of the People shall have power—
(a) to make any grant in advance in respect of the estimated expenditure for a part of any financial year pending the completion of the procedure prescribed in article 113 for the voting of such grant and the passing of the law in accordance with the provisions of article 114 in relation to that expenditure; and
(b) to make a grant for meeting an unexpected demand upon the resources of India when on account of the magnitude or the indefinite character of the service the demand cannot be stated with the details ordinarily given in an annual financial statement.
(2) The provisions of articles 115 and 116 shall have effect in relation to the making of any grant under clause (1) and to any law to be made under article 114 in relation to such grant as they have effect in relation to the making of a grant with regard to any expenditure mentioned in the annual financial statement and the law to be made for the authorization of appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated Fund of India to meet such expenditure.

Article 443: Supplementary, additional or excess grants
(1) The President shall cause to be laid before both the Houses of Parliament any estimate supplementary, additional or excess expenditure, if any, required to be made from the Consolidated Fund of India in respect of every financial year.
(2) The provisions of articles 113 and 114 shall have effect in relation to those estimates as they have effect in relation to the annual financial statement and the statement of estimated receipts and expenditure of the Government of India for that year.

Article 444: Power of Parliament to amend the Constitution and procedure therefor
(1) Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, Parliament may in exercise of its constituent power amend by way of addition, variation or repeal any provision of this Constitution in accordance with the procedure laid down in this article.
(2) An amendment of this Constitution may be initiated only by the introduction of a Bill for the purpose in either House of Parliament, and when the Bill is passed in each House by a majority of the total membership of that House present and voting, it shall be presented to the President who shall give his assent to the Bill and thereupon the Constitution shall stand amended in accordance with the terms of the Bill:
Provided that if such amendment seeks to make any change in—
(a) Article 54, Article 55, Article 73, Article 162 or Article 241, or
(b) Chapter IV of Part V, Chapter V of Part VI, or Chapter I of Part XI,
the amendment shall also require to be ratified by the Legislatures of not less than one-half of the States by resolutions to that effect passed by those Legislatures before the Bill making provision for such amendment is presented to the President for assent.
(3) In this article, reference to any substantial question of law as to the interpretation of this Constitution shall be construed as including a reference to any substantial question of law as to the interpretation of the Government of India Act, 1935 (including any enactment amending or supplementing that Act), or of any Order in Council or order made thereunder, or of the Indian Independence Act, 1947, or of any order made thereunder.

Article 445: Procedure for amendment in certain cases
(1) Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, the provisions of this Chapter shall not apply to any amendment of this Constitution made under article 368 to—
(a) Article 54, Article 55, Article 73, Article 162 or Article 241, or
(b) Chapter IV of Part V, Chapter V of Part VI, or Chapter I of Part XI.
(2) No amendment of this Constitution (including the provisions of Part III) made or purporting to have been made under this article whether before or after the commencement of section 55 of the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976 shall be called in question in any court on any ground.

Article 446: Special provisions as to financial Bills
(1) A Bill or amendment making provision for any of the matters specified in sub-clauses (a) to (f) of clause (1) of article 110 shall not be introduced or moved except on the of the President and a Bill making such provision shall not be introduced in a State Legislature except on the recommendation of the Governor.
(2) A Bill or amendment shall not be deemed to make provision for any of the matters aforesaid by reason only that it provides for the imposition of fines or other pecuniary penalties, or for the demand or payment of fees for licences or fees for services rendered, or by reason that it provides for the imposition, abolition, remission, alteration or regulation of any tax by any local authority or body for local purposes.
(3) A Bill which, if enacted and brought into operation, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India or the Consolidated Fund of a State shall not be passed by either House of Parliament or by the Legislature of a State unless the President or the Governor, as the case may be, has recommended to that House the consideration of the Bill.

Article 447: Interpretation
In this Chapter and in any law made by Parliament or the Legislature of a State, references to any substantial financial powers of the President or the Governor shall include references to any other powers vested in him which are exercisable in his discretion for the purpose of giving effect to the provisions of this Constitution relating to the appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated Fund of India or the Consolidated Fund of the State, as the case may be.

Article 448: Annual financial statement
(1) The President shall in respect of every financial year cause to be laid before both the Houses of Parliament a statement of the estimated receipts and expenditure of the Government of India for that year, in this Part referred to as the "annual financial statement".
(2) The estimates of expenditure embodied in the annual financial statement shall show separately—
(a) the sums required to meet expenditure described by this Constitution as expenditure charged upon the Consolidated Fund of India; and
(b) the sums required to meet other expenditure proposed to be made from the Consolidated Fund of India, and shall distinguish expenditure on revenue account from other expenditure.

Preamble:
We, the People of India, having solemnly resolved to constitute India into a SOVEREIGN SOCIALIST SECULAR DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC and to secure to all its citizens: JUSTICE, social, economic and political; LIBERTY of thought, expression, belief, faith and worship; EQUALITY of status and opportunity; and to promote among them all FRATERNITY assuring the dignity of the individual and the unity and integrity of the Nation, do hereby adopt, enact and give to ourselves this Constitution.
We, the people of India, having solemnly resolved to constitute India into a sovereign, socialist, secular, democratic republic and to secure to all its citizens: 
Justice, social, economic and political; 
Liberty of thought, expression, belief, faith and worship; 
Equality of status and opportunity; and to promote among them all fraternity assuring the dignity of the individual and the unity and integrity of the Nation. 

Fundamental Rights:
The Fundamental Rights are the basic rights and freedoms that are guaranteed to all citizens of India by the Constitution of India. They are enshrined in Part III of the Constitution, and are divided into six categories:
* Right to Equality
* Right to Freedom
* Right against Exploitation
* Right to Freedom of Religion
* Cultural and Educational Rights
* Right to Property
* Right to Constitutional Remedies
The Fundamental Rights are enforceable in the courts, and any violation of these rights can be challenged in a court of law.

Schedules:
Schedule 1: The Union List
The Union List is one of the three lists in the Seventh Schedule of the Indian Constitution. It lists the subjects on which the Union Parliament has exclusive legislative power. The other two lists are the State List and the Concurrent List.

Schedule 2: Salaries and Allowances of President, Vice-President, Governors, etc.
Schedule 2 of the Indian Constitution lists the salaries and allowances of the President, Vice-President, Governors, Speakers of the two Houses of Parliament, the Chief Justice of India, and other high-ranking officials.

Schedule 3: Allocation of Revenues between the Union and the States
Schedule 3 of the Indian Constitution lists the sources of revenue that are allocated between the Union and the States.

Schedule 4: Allocation of Seats in the Council of States
Schedule 4 of the Indian Constitution specifies the number of seats that are allocated to each State and Union Territory in the Council of States.

Schedule 5: Administration of Scheduled Areas and Scheduled Tribes
Schedule 5 of the Indian Constitution deals with the administration of Scheduled Areas and Scheduled Tribes in India.

Schedule 6: Special Provisions Relating to Certain States
Schedule 6 of the Indian Constitution contains special provisions relating to the States of Assam, Meghalaya, Mizoram, and Nagaland.

Schedule 7: Finance, Property, Contracts and Suits
Schedule 7 of the Indian Constitution deals with the distribution of legislative powers between the Union and the States in relation to finance, property, contracts and suits.

Schedule 8: Language
Schedule 8 of the Indian Constitution lists the 22 official languages of India. These languages are used for official purposes in the Union and in the States.

Schedule 9: Laws to be Passed by Parliament with Special Majority
Schedule 9 of the Indian Constitution lists certain laws that can only be passed by Parliament with a special majority.

Schedule 10: Provisions as to Disqualification on Ground of Defection
Schedule 10 of the Indian Constitution deals with the disqualification of members of Parliament and State Legislatures on the ground of defection.

Schedule 11: Panchayats
Schedule 11 of the Indian Constitution deals with the establishment, composition, powers and functions of Panchayats in India.

Schedule 12: Finance Commission
Schedule 12 of the Indian Constitution deals with the composition, functions, and powers of the Finance Commission.

Fundamental Duties:
Fundamental duties are the moral obligations that every citizen of India has towards the nation and fellow citizens. They were added to the Indian Constitution in 1976.

Directive Principles of State Policy:
Directive Principles of State Policy (DPSP) are a set of guidelines for the government of India to follow in order to create a just and equitable society. They were added to the Indian Constitution in 1950.

Part I – The Union and its Territories:

Part I of the Indian Constitution deals with the Union and its Territories. It defines the territories that constitute the Union of India, and it establishes the central government of India.

Part II – Citizenship:
Part II of the Indian Constitution deals with Citizenship. It defines who is a citizen of India, and it sets out the procedures for acquiring and losing citizenship.

Part III – Fundamental Rights:
Part III of the Indian Constitution deals with Fundamental Rights. It guarantees certain rights to all citizens of India, including the right to equality, the right to freedom, the right to property, and the right to life and personal liberty.

Part IV – Directive Principles of State Policy:
Part IV of the Indian Constitution contains a set of principles that the state should strive to achieve. These principles are not enforceable by the courts, but they are nevertheless important in guiding the government's policies.

Part IV A – Fundamental Duties:
Part IV A of the Indian Constitution contains a list of 11 fundamental duties that are expected of all citizens of India. These duties are not enforceable by the courts, but they are nevertheless important in guiding the behavior of citizens.

Part V – The Union:
Part V of the Indian Constitution deals with the structure of the Union government. It establishes a parliamentary system of government at the Union level, with a President as the head of state and a Prime Minister as the head of government.

Part VI – The States:
(1) Legislative powers of the State.—Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, the Legislature of a State shall have exclusive power to make laws for such State or any part thereof with respect to any of the matters enumerated in List II in the Seventh Schedule (in this Constitution referred to as the “State List”).
(2) Nothing in clause (1) shall derogate from the powers of Parliament to make laws with respect to any matter for a State or any part thereof.

Part VII – The States in Part B of First Schedule:
Part VII of the Indian Constitution deals with the states that were formerly princely states or `Part B` states. These states were governed by a Rajpramukh, who was appointed by the President. The Rajpramukh had the power to appoint the Chief Minister and the Council of Ministers.

Part VIII - The Union Territories:
Article 239: Administration of Union territories.-(1) Save as otherwise provided by Parliament by law, every Union territory shall be administered by the President acting, to such extent as he thinks fit, through an administrator to be appointed by him with such designation as he may specify.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in Part VI, the President may appoint the Governor of a State as the administrator of an adjoining Union territory, and where a Governor is so appointed, he shall exercise his functions as such administrator independently of his Council of Ministers.
(3) Nothing in this article shall in any way affect the provisions of article 239A.
Article 239A: Creation of local Legislatures or Council of Ministers or both for certain Union territories.—(1) Parliament may by law create for the Union territory of Puducherry—
(a) a body, whether elected or partly nominated and partly elected, to function as a Legislature for the Union territory, or
(b) a Council of Ministers, or both with such constitution, powers and functions, in each case, as may be specified in the law.
(2) Any such law as is referred to in clause (1) shall not be deemed to be an amendment of this Constitution for the purposes of article 368 notwithstanding that it contains any provision which amends or has the effect of amending this Constitution.

Part IX - The Panchayats:
Part IX of the Indian Constitution deals with the panchayats, which are local self-government institutions in India. The panchayats are responsible for a wide range of functions, including:
* Providing basic amenities such as water, sanitation, and education.
* Promoting rural development.
* Ensuring the participation of the people in local governance.

Part IXA - The Municipalities:
Part IXA of the Indian Constitution deals with the municipalities, which are local self-government institutions in India. The municipalities are responsible for a wide range of functions, including:
* Providing basic amenities such as water, sanitation, and education.
* Promoting urban development.
* Ensuring the participation of the people in local governance.

Part IXB – The Co-operative Societies:
Part IXB of the Indian Constitution deals with the co-operative societies, which are voluntary organizations formed by people to meet their common economic, social, and cultural needs.

Part X – The Scheduled and Tribal Areas:
(1) The provisions of this Constitution relating to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes shall apply to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes in any State other than the States of Assam, Meghalaya, Tripura and Mizoram.
(2) The President may with respect to any State or Union territory, and where it is a State, after consultation with the Governor thereof, by public notification, specify the tribes or tribal communities or parts of or groups within tribes or tribal communities which shall for the purposes of this Constitution be deemed to be Scheduled Tribes in relation to that State or Union territory, as the case may be.
(3) Parliament may by law include in or exclude from the list of Scheduled Tribes specified in a notification issued under clause (1) any tribe or tribal community or part of or group within any tribe or tribal community, but save as aforesaid a notification issued under the said clause shall not be varied by any subsequent notification.
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in paragraph 2, no notification in relation to a State or Union territory shall be issued under that paragraph except in consultation with the Governor of that State or Union territory.

Part XI – Relation between the Union and the States:
Part XI of the Indian Constitution deals with the relationship between the Union and the States. This part of the Constitution sets out the powers of the Union and the States, as well as the ways in which the two levels of government can interact with each other.

Part XII – Finance, Property, Contracts and Suits:
Part XII of the Indian Constitution deals with the financial, property, contractual and judicial aspects of the Union and the States. This part of the Constitution sets out the rules and procedures for the management of public finances, the ownership of property, the enforcement of contracts, and the resolution of disputes.

Part XIII – Trade, Commerce and Intercourse within the territory of India:
Part XIII of the Indian Constitution deals with the trade, commerce, and intercourse within the territory of India. This part of the Constitution sets out the principles for the free movement of goods, people, and services within India.

Part XIV – Services Under the Union and the States:
(1) The services under the Union and the States shall be regulated by the appropriate law made by Parliament or, as the case may be, the Legislature of the State.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such law may provide for—
(a) the recruitment, and conditions of service of persons appointed, to public services and posts in connection with the affairs of the Union or of any State;

Part XIVA – Tribunals:
(1) Parliament may, by law, provide for the establishment of tribunals for the adjudication of disputes relating to matters specified in clause (2) with respect to which any law made by Parliament is competent to enact.
(2) The provisions of this article shall apply to the following classes of tribunals, namely:
(a) tribunals for the Union and a State or for two or more States;
(b) tribunals for foreign exchange, customs and excise or industrial and labour disputes;
(c) tribunals for taxes on income other than agricultural income;
(d) tribunals for land reforms by way of acquisition by the State of any estate as defined in article 31A or of any rights therein or the extinguishment or modification of any such rights or for deciding disputes in respect of any matter arising from such acquisition or extinguishment or modification of rights;
(e) tribunals to determine the validity, or otherwise, of decisions of the Central and State Governments or any local or other authority that are violative of the rights of citizens as envisaged in Part III of this Constitution;
(f) tribunals for any matter referred to them by any law made by Parliament.

Part XV – Elections:
(1) The President, Vice-President, members of Parliament, the State Legislatures and the members of the Committee referred to in clause (1) of article 324 shall be elected by direct election.
(2) Election to the House of the People and to the Legislative Assemblies of States shall be on the basis of adult suffrage; that is to say, every person who is a citizen of India and who is not less than eighteen years of age on such date as may be fixed in that behalf by or under any law made by the appropriate Legislature and is not otherwise disqualified under this Constitution or any law made by the appropriate Legislature on the ground of non-residence, unsoundness of mind, crime or corrupt or illegal practice, shall be entitled to be registered as a voter at any such election.
(3) of the People Act, 1950 and the of the People Act, 1951 shall provide for the conduct of elections to the Houses of Parliament and to the Houses of the Legislature of each State, the qualifications of voters at such elections, the delimitation of constituencies for the purpose of elections, the preparation of electoral rolls, the manner of filling seats in the Council of States to be filled by representatives of Union territories, and matters connected therewith.

Part XVI – Special provisions relating to certain classes:
Part XVI of the Indian Constitution deals with special provisions relating to certain classes, including Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes, and Anglo-Indians. This part of the Constitution sets out the special rights and privileges that are granted to these classes.

Part XVII – Official language:
Part XVII of the Indian Constitution deals with the official language of India. This part of the Constitution sets out the languages that are to be used for official purposes in India.

Part XVIII – Emergency Provisions:
Part XVIII of the Indian Constitution deals with the emergency provisions. This part of the Constitution allows the President of India to declare a state of emergency in the country.

Part XIX – Miscellaneous:
Part XIX of the Indian Constitution deals with miscellaneous provisions. This part of the Constitution includes provisions on a variety of topics, such as the appointment of the Comptroller and Auditor General, the salaries of the President and the Prime Minister, and the privileges of Parliament.

Part XX – Amendment of the Constitution:
Part XX of the Indian Constitution deals with the amendment of the Constitution. This part of the Constitution lays down the procedure for amending the Constitution, which is more difficult than the procedure for amending ordinary laws.

Part XXI – Temporary, Transitional and Special Provisions:
Part XXI of the Indian Constitution deals with temporary, transitional and special provisions. This part of the Constitution includes provisions on a variety of topics, such as the continuation of existing laws, the establishment of the Election Commission, and the special provisions for the State of Jammu and Kashmir.

Part XXII – Short Title, Commencement, Authoritative Text in Hindi and Repeals:
Part XXII of the Indian Constitution deals with the short title, commencement, authoritative text in Hindi and repeals. This part of the Constitution includes provisions on the short title of the Constitution, the commencement of the Constitution, the authoritative text of the Constitution in Hindi, and the repeal of certain laws.

PREAMBLE:
WE, THE PEOPLE OF INDIA, having solemnly resolved to constitute India into a
SOVEREIGN, SOCIALIST, SECULAR, DEMOCRATIC, REPUBLIC and to secure to all its
citizens:
JUSTICE, social, economic and political;
LIBERTY of thought, expression, belief, faith and worship;
EQUALITY of status and of opportunity; and to promote among them all
FRATERNITY assuring the dignity of the individual and the unity and integrity of the
nation;
IN OUR CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY this twenty-sixth day of November 1949, do
HEREBY ADOPT, ENACT AND GIVE TO OURSELVES THIS CONSTITUTION.

PART I: THE UNION AND ITS TERRITORY
Article 1: Name and territory of the Union.
Article 2: Admission or establishment of new States.
Article 2A: [Repealed].
Article 3: Formation of new States and alteration of areas, boundaries or names of existing States.
Article 4: Laws made under articles 2 and 3 to provide for the amendment of the First and the Fourth Schedules and supplemental, incidental and consequential matters.

PART II: CITIZENSHIP
Article 5: Citizenship at the commencement of the Constitution.
Article 6: Rights of citizenship of certain persons who have migrated to India from Pakistan.
Article 7: Rights of citizenship of certain migrants to Pakistan.
Article 8: Rights of citizenship of certain persons of Indian origin residing outside India.
Article 9: Persons voluntarily acquiring citizenship of a foreign State not to be citizens.
Article 10: Continuance of the rights of citizenship.
Article 11: Parliament to regulate the right of citizenship by law.

PART III : FUNDAMENTAL RIGHTS
General:
Article 12: Definition.
Article 13: Laws inconsistent with or in derogation of the fundamental rights.

Right to Equality:
Article 14: Equality before law.
Article 15: Prohibition of discrimination on grounds of religion, race, caste, sex or place of birth.
Article 16: Equality of opportunity in matters of public employment.
Article 17: Abolition of Untouchability.
Article 18: Abolition of titles.

Right to Freedom:
Article 19: Protection of certain rights regarding freedom of speech, etc.
Article 20: Protection in respect of conviction for offences.
Article 21: Protection of life and personal liberty.
Article 21A: Right to education
Article 22: Protection against arrest and detention in certain cases.

Right against Exploitation:
Article 23: Prohibition of traffic in human beings and forced labour.
Article 24: Prohibition of employment of children in factories, etc.

Right to Freedom of Religion:
Article 25: Freedom of conscience and free profession, practice and propagation of religion.
Article 26: Freedom to manage religious affairs.
Article 27: Freedom as to payment of taxes for promotion of any particular religion.
Article 28: Freedom as to attendance at religious instruction or religious worship in certain educational institutions.

Cultural and Educational Rights:
Article 29: Protection of interests of minorities.
Article 30: Right of minorities to establish and administer educational institutions.
Article 31: [Repealed].

Saving of Certain Laws:
Article 31A: Saving of Laws providing for the acquisition of estates, etc.
Article 31B: Validation of certain Acts and Regulations.
Article 31C: Saving of laws giving effect to certain directive principles.
Article 31D: [Repealed].

Right to Constitutional Remedies:
Article 32: Remedies for enforcement of rights conferred by this Part.
Article 32A: [Repealed.]
Article 33: Power of Parliament to modify the rights conferred by this Part in their application to Forces, etc.
Article 34: Restriction on rights conferred by this Part while martial law is in force in any area.
Article 35: Legislation to give effect to the provisions of this Part.

PART IV: DIRECTIVE PRINCIPLES OF STATE POLICY
Article 36: Definition.
Article 37: Application of the principles contained in this Part.
Article 38: State to secure a social order for the promotion of the welfare of the people.
Article 39: Certain principles of policy to be followed by the State.
Article 39A: Equal justice and free legal aid.
Article 40: The organisation of village panchayats.
Article 41: Right to work, to education and to public assistance in certain cases.
Article 42: Provision for just and humane conditions of work and maternity relief.
Article 43: Living wage, etc., for workers.
Article 43A: Participation of workers in the management of industries.
Article 43B: Promotion of co-operative societies.
Article 44: Uniform civil code for the citizens.
Article 45: Provision for free and compulsory education for children.
Article 46: Promotion of educational and economic interests of Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and other weaker sections.
Article 47: Duty of the State to raise the level of nutrition and the standard of living and to improve public health.
Article 48: The organisation of agriculture and animal husbandry.
Article 48: A Protection and improvement of environment and safeguarding of forests and wildlife.
Article 49: Protection of monuments and places and objects of national importance.
Article 50: Separation of judiciary from the executive.
Article 51: Promotion of international peace and security.

PART IVA: FUNDAMENTAL DUTIES
Article 51A: Fundamental duties.

PART V: THE UNION:
CHAPTER I: THE EXECUTIVE

The President:
Article 52: The President of India.
Article 53: The executive power of the Union.
Article 54: Election of President.
Article 55: Manner of election of President.
Article 56: Term of office of President.
Article 57: Eligibility for re-election.
Article 58: Qualifications for election as President.
Article 59: Conditions of the President’s office.
Article 60: Oath or affirmation by the President.
Article 61: Procedure for impeachment of the President.
Article 62: Time of holding the election to fill the vacancy in the office of President and the term of office of person elected to fill the casual vacancy.

The Vice-President:
Article 63: The Vice-President of India.
Article 64: The Vice-President to be ex officio Chairman of the Council of States.
Article 65: The Vice-President to act as President or to discharge his functions during casual vacancies in the office, or during the absence, of President.
Article 66: Election of Vice-President.
Article 67: Term of office of Vice-President.
Article 68: Time of holding the election to fill the vacancy in the office of Vice-President and the term of office of person elected to fill the casual vacancy.
Article 69: Oath or affirmation by the Vice-President.
Article 70: Discharge of President’s functions in other contingencies.
Article 71: Matters relating to, or connected with, the election of a President or Vice-President.
Article 72: Power of President to grant pardons, etc., and to suspend, remit or commute sentences in certain cases.
Article 73: The extent of executive power of the Union.

Council of Ministers:
Article 74: Council of Ministers to aid and advise the President.
Article 75: Other provisions as to Ministers.

The Attorney-General for India:
Article 76: Attorney-General for India.

Conduct of Government Business:
Article 77: Conduct of business of the Government of India.
Article 78: Duties of Prime Minister as respects the furnishing of information to the President, etc.

CHAPTER II: PARLIAMENT
General
Article 79: Constitution of Parliament.
Article 80: Composition of the Council of States.
Article 81: Composition of the House of the People.
Article 82: Readjustment after each census.
Article 83: Duration of Houses of Parliament.
Article 84: Qualification for membership of Parliament.
Article 85: Sessions of Parliament, prorogation and dissolution.
Article 86: Right of President to address and send messages to Houses.
Article 87: Special address by the President.
Article 88: Rights of Ministers and Attorney-General as respects Houses.

Officers of Parliament:
Article 89: The Chairman and Deputy Chairman of the Council of States.
Article 90: Vacation and resignation of, and removal from, the office of Deputy Chairman.
Article 91: Power of the Deputy Chairman or other person to perform the duties of the office of, or to act as, Chairman.
Article 92: The Chairman or the Deputy Chairman not to preside while a resolution for his removal from office is under consideration.
Article 93: The Speaker and Deputy Speaker of the House of the People .
Article 94: Vacation and resignation of, and removal from, the offices of Speaker and Deputy Speaker.
Article 95: Power of the Deputy Speaker or other person to perform the duties of the office of, or to act as, Speaker.
Article 96: The Speaker or the Deputy Speaker not to preside while a resolution for his removal from office is under consideration.
Article 97: Salaries and allowances of the Chairman and Deputy Chairman and the Speaker and Deputy Speaker.
Article 98: Secretariat of Parliament.

Conduct of Business:
Article 99: Oath or affirmation by members.
Article 100: Voting in Houses, power of Houses to act notwithstanding vacancies and quorum.

Disqualifications of Members:
Article 101: Vacation of seats.
Article 102: Disqualifications for membership.
Article 103: Decision on questions as to disqualifications of members.
Article 104: Penalty for sitting and voting before making oath or affirmation under article 99 or when not qualified or when disqualified. Powers, Privileges and Immunities of Parliament and its Members
Article 105: Powers, privileges, etc., of the Houses of Parliament and of the members and committees thereof.
Article 106: Salaries and allowances of members.

Legislative Procedure:
Article 107: Provisions as to introduction and passing of Bills.
Article 108: Joint sitting of both Houses in certain cases.
Article 109: Special procedure in respect of Money Bills.
Article 110: Definition of “Money Bills”.
Article 111: Assent to Bills.

Procedure in Financial Matters:
Article 112: Annual financial statement.
Article 113: Procedure in Parliament with respect to estimates.
Article 114: Appropriation Bills.
Article 115: Supplementary, additional or excess grants.
Article 116: Votes on account, votes of credit and exceptional grants.
Article 117: Special provisions as to financial Bills.

Procedure Generally:
Article 118: Rules of procedure.
Article 119: Regulation by law of procedure in Parliament in relation to financial business.
Article 120: Language to be used in Parliament.
Article 121: Restriction on discussion in Parliament.
Article 122: Courts not to inquire into proceedings of Parliament.

CHAPTER III: LEGISLATIVE POWERS OF THE PRESIDENT:
Article 123: Power of President to promulgate Ordinances during recess of Parliament.

CHAPTER IV: THE UNION JUDICIARY
Article 124: Establishment and constitution of Supreme Court.
Article 124A: National Judicial Appointments Commission. (Declared unconstitutional by the Supreme Court, however not repealed by the Parliament)
Article 124B: Functions of Commission.
Article 124C: Power of Parliament to make law.
Article 125: Salaries, etc., of Judges.
Article 126: Appointment of acting Chief Justice.
Article 127: Appointment of ad hoc judges.
Article 128: Attendance of retired Judges at sittings of the Supreme Court.
Article 129: Supreme Court to be a court of record.
Article 130: Seat of Supreme Court.
Article 131: Original jurisdiction of the Supreme Court.
Article 131A: [Repealed].
Article 132: Appellate jurisdiction of Supreme Court in appeals from High Courts in certain cases.
Article 133: Appellate jurisdiction of Supreme Court in appeals from High Courts in regard to Civil matters.
Article 134: Appellate jurisdiction of Supreme Court in regard to criminal matters.
Article 134A: Certificate for appeal to the Supreme Court.
Article 135: Jurisdiction and powers of the Federal Court under existing law to be exercisable by the Supreme Court.
Article 136: Special leave to appeal by the Supreme Court.
Article 137: Review of judgments or orders by the Supreme Court.
Article 138: Enlargement of the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court.
Article 139: Conferment on the Supreme Court of powers to issue certain writs.
Article 139A: Transfer of certain cases.
Article 140: Ancillary powers of Supreme Court.
Article 141: Law declared by Supreme Court to be binding on all courts.
Article 142: Enforcement of decrees and orders of Supreme Court and orders as to discovery, etc.
Article 143: Power of President to consult Supreme Court.
Article 144: Civil and judicial authorities to act in aid of the Supreme Court.
Article 144A: [Repealed].
Article 145: Rules of Court, etc.
Article 146: Officers and servants and the expenses of the Supreme Court.
Article 147: Interpretation.

CHAPTER V: COMPTROLLER AND AUDITOR-GENERAL OF INDIA
Article 148: Comptroller and Auditor-General of India.
Article 149: Duties and powers of the Comptroller and Auditor-General.
Article 150: Form of accounts of the Union and of the States.
Article 151: Audit reports.

PART VI: THE STATES
CHAPTER I: GENERAL
Article 152: Definition.

CHAPTER II: THE EXECUTIVE
The Governor:
Article 153: Governors of States.
Article 154: Executive power of State.
Article 155: Appointment of Governor.
Article 156: Term of office of Governor.
Article 157: Qualifications for appointment as Governor.
Article 158: Conditions of Governor’s office
Article 159: Oath or affirmation by the Governor.
Article 160: Discharge of the functions of the Governor in certain contingencies.
Article 161: Power of Governor to grant pardons, etc., and to suspend, remit or commute sentences in certain cases.
Article 162: Extent of executive power of State.

Council of Ministers:
Article 163: Council of Ministers to aid and advise Governor.
Article 164: Other provisions as to Ministers.

The Advocate-General for the State:
Article 165: Advocate-General for the State.

Conduct of Government Business:
Article 166: Conduct of business of the Government of a State.
Article 167: Duties of Chief Minister as respects the furnishing of information to Governor, etc.

CHAPTER III: THE STATE LEGISLATURE
General
Article 168: Constitution of Legislatures in States.
Article 169: Abolition or creation of Legislative Councils in States.
Article 170: Composition of the Legislative Assemblies.
Article 171: Composition of the Legislative Councils.
Article 172: Duration of State Legislatures.
Article 173: Qualification for membership of the State Legislature.
Article 174: Sessions of the State Legislature, prorogation and dissolution.
Article 175: Right of Governor to address and send messages to the House or Houses.
Article 176: Special address by the Governor.
Article 177: Rights of Ministers and Advocate-General as respects the Houses.

Officers of the State Legislature:
Article 178: The Speaker and Deputy Speaker of the Legislative Assembly.
Article 179: Vacation and resignation of, and removal from, the offices of Speaker and Deputy Speaker.
Article 180: Power of the Deputy Speaker or other person to perform the duties of the office of, or to act as, Speaker.
Article 181: The Speaker or the Deputy Speaker not to preside while a resolution for his removal from office is under consideration.
Article 182: The Chairman and Deputy Chairman of the Legislative Council.
Article 183: Vacation and resignation of, and removal from, the offices of Chairman and Deputy Chairman.
Article 184: Power of the Deputy Chairman or other person to perform the duties of the office of, or to act as, Chairman.
Article 185: The Chairman or the Deputy Chairman not to preside while a resolution for his removal from office is under consideration.
Article 186: Salaries and allowances of the Speaker and Deputy Speaker and the Chairman and Deputy Chairman.
Article 187: Secretariat of State Legislature.

Conduct of Business:
Article 188: Oath or affirmation by members.
Article 189: Voting in Houses, power of Houses to act notwithstanding vacancies and quorum.

Disqualifications of Members:
Article 190: Vacation of seats.
Article 191: Disqualifications for membership.
Article 192: Decision on questions as to disqualifications of members.
Article 193: Penalty for sitting and voting before making oath or affirmation under article 188 or when not qualified or when disqualified.

Powers, privileges and immunities of State Legislatures and their Members:
Article 194: Powers, privileges, etc., of the Houses of Legislatures and of the members and committees thereof.
Article 195: Salaries and allowances of members.

Legislative Procedure:
Article 196: Provisions as to introduction and passing of Bills.
Article 197: Restriction on powers of Legislative Council as to Bills other than Money Bills.
Article 198: Special procedure in respect of Money Bills.
Article 199: Definition of “Money Bills”.
Article 200: Assent to Bills.
Article 201: Bills reserved for consideration.

Procedure in Financial Matters:
Article 202: Annual financial statement.
Article 203: Procedure in Legislature with respect to estimates.
Article 204: Appropriation Bills.
Article 205: Supplementary, additional or excess grants.
Article 206: Votes on account, votes of credit and exceptional grants.
Article 207: Special provisions as to financial Bills.

Procedure Generally:
Article 208: Rules of procedure.
Article 209: Regulation by law of procedure in the Legislature of the State in relation to financial business.
Article 210: Language to be used in the Legislature.
Article 211: Restriction on discussion in the Legislature.
Article 212: Courts not to inquire into proceedings of the Legislature.

CHAPTER IV : LEGISLATIVE POWER OF THE GOVERNOR
Article 213: Power of Governor to promulgate Ordinances during recess of Legislature.

CHAPTER V: THE HIGH COURTS IN THE STATES
Article 214: High Courts for States.
Article 215: High Courts to be courts of record.
Article 216: Constitution of High Courts.
Article 217: Appointment and conditions of the office of a Judge of a High Court.
Article 218: Application of certain provisions relating to Supreme Court to High Courts.
Article 219: Oath or affirmation by Judges of High Courts.
Article 220: Restriction on practice after being a permanent Judge.
Article 221: Salaries, etc., of Judges.
Article 222: Transfer of a Judge from one High Court to another.
Article 223: Appointment of acting Chief Justice.
Article 224: Appointment of additional and acting Judges.
Article 224A: Appointment of retired Judges at sittings of High Courts.
Article 225: Jurisdiction of existing High Courts.
Article 226: Power of High Courts to issue certain writs.
Article 226A: [Repealed].
Article 227: Power of superintendence over all courts by the High Court.
Article 228: Transfer of certain cases to High Court.
Article 228A: [Repealed].
Article 229: Officers and servants and the expenses of High Courts.
Article 230: Extension of jurisdiction of High Courts to Union territories.
Article 231: Establishment of a common High Court for two or more States.

CHAPTER VI : SUBORDINATE COURTS
Article 233: Appointment of district judges.
Article 233A: Validation of appointments of, and judgments, etc., delivered by, certain district judges.
Article 234: Recruitment of persons other than district judges to the judicial service.
Article 235: Control over subordinate courts.
Article 236: Interpretation.
Article 237: Application of the provisions of this Chapter to certain class or classes of magistrates.

PART VII: THE STATES IN PART B OF THE FIRST SCHEDULE
Article 238: [Repealed].

PART VIII: THE UNION TERRITORIES
Article 239: Administration of Union territories.
Article 239A: Creation of local Legislatures or Council of Ministers or both for certain Union territories.
Article 239AA: Special provisions with respect to Delhi.
Article 239AB: Provision in case of failure of constitutional machinery.
Article 239B: Power of the administrator to promulgate Ordinances during recess of Legislature.
Article 240: Power of President to make regulations for certain Union territories.
Article 241: High Courts for Union territories.
Article 242: [Repealed]

PART IX: THE PANCHAYATS
Article 243: Definitions.
Article 243A: Gram Sabha.
Article 243B: Constitution of Panchayats.
Article 243C: Composition of Panchayats.
Article 243D: Reservation of seats.
Article 243E: Duration of Panchayats, etc.
Article 243F: Disqualifications for membership.
Article 243G: Powers, authority and responsibilities of Panchayats.
Article 243H: Powers to impose taxes by, and Funds of, the Panchayats.
Article 243-I: Constitution of Finance Commission to review financial position.
Article 243J : Audit of accounts of Panchayats.
Article 243K: Elections to the Panchayats.
Article 243L: Application to Union territories.
Article 243M: Part not to apply to certain areas.
Article 243N: Continuance of existing laws and Panchayats.
Article 243O: Bar to interference by courts in electoral matters.

PART IXA: THE MUNICIPALITIES
Article 243P: Definitions.
Article 243Q: Constitution of Municipalities.
Article 243R: Composition of Municipalities.
Article 243S: Constitution and composition of Wards Committees, etc.
Article 243T: Reservation of seats.
Article 243U: Duration of Municipalities, etc.
Article 243V: Disqualifications for membership.
Article 243W: Powers, authority and responsibilities of Municipalities, etc.
Article 243X: Power to impose taxes by, and Funds of, the Municipalities.
Article 243Y: Finance Commission.
Article 243Z: Audit of accounts of Municipalities.
Article 243ZA: Elections to the Municipalities.
Article 243ZB: Application to Union territories.
Article 243ZC: Part not to apply to certain areas.
Article 243ZD: Committee for district planning.
Article 243ZE: Committee for Metropolitan planning.
Article 243ZF: Continuance of existing laws and Municipalities.
Article 243ZG: Bar to interference by Courts in electoral matters.

PART IXB: THE CO-OPERATIVE SOCIETIES
Article 243ZH: Definitions
Article 243ZI: Incorporation of co-operative societies
Article 243ZJ: Number and term of members of the board and its office bearers.
Article 243 ZK: Election of members of board.
Article 243ZL: Supersession and suspension of the board and interim management.
Article 243ZM: Audit of accounts of co-operative societies.
Article 243ZN: Convening of general body meetings.
Article 243ZO: Right of a member to get information,
Article 243ZP: Returns.
Article 243ZQ: Offences and penalties.
Article 243ZR: Application to multi-state co-operative societies.
Article 243ZS: Application to Union Territories.
Article 243ZT: Continuance of existing laws.

PART X: THE SCHEDULED AND TRIBAL AREAS
Article 244: Administration of Scheduled Areas and Tribal Areas.
Article 244A: Formation of an autonomous State comprising certain tribal areas in Assam and creation of local Legislature or Council of Ministers or both therefor.

PART XI: RELATIONS BETWEEN THE UNION AND THE STATES
CHAPTER I: LEGISLATIVE RELATIONS
Distribution of Legislative Powers:
Article 245: Extent of laws made by Parliament and by the Legislatures of States.
Article 246: Subject-matter of laws made by Parliament and by the Legislatures of States.
Article 246A: Special provision with respect to goods and services tax.
Article 247: Power of Parliament to provide for the establishment of certain additional courts.
Article 248: Residuary powers of legislation.
Article 249: Power of Parliament to legislate with respect to a matter in the State List in the national interest.
Article 250: Power of Parliament to legislate with respect to any matter in the State List if a

Proclamation of Emergency is in operation:
Article 251: Inconsistency between laws made by Parliament under articles 249 and 250 and laws made by the Legislatures of States.
Article 252: Power of Parliament to legislate for two or more States by consent and adoption of such legislation by any other State.
Article 253: Legislation for giving effect to international agreements.
Article 254: Inconsistency between laws made by Parliament and laws made by the Legislatures of States.
Article 255: Requirements as to recommendations and previous sanctions to be regarded as matters of procedure only.

CHAPTER II : ADMINISTRATIVE RELATIONS
General
Article 256: Obligation of States and the Union.
Article 257: Control of the Union over States in certain cases.
Article 257A: [Repealed].
Article 258: Power of the Union to confer powers, etc., on States in certain cases.
Article 258A: Power of the States to entrust functions to the Union.
Article 259: [Repealed].
Article 260: Jurisdiction of the Union in relation to territories outside India.
Article 261: Public acts, records and judicial proceedings.

Disputes relating to Waters:
Article 262: Adjudication of disputes relating to waters of inter-State rivers or river valleys. 

Co-ordination between States:
Article 263: Provisions with respect to an inter-State Council.

PART XII: FINANCE, PROPERTY, CONTRACTS AND SUITS
CHAPTER I: FINANCE
General
Article 264: Interpretation.
Article 265: Taxes not to be imposed save by authority of law.
Article 266: Consolidated Funds and public accounts of India and of the States.
Article 267: Contingency Fund.

Distribution of Revenues between the Union and the States:
Article 268: Duties levied by the Union but collected and appropriated by the State.
Article 268A: [Repealed].
Article 269: Taxes levied and collected by the Union but assigned to the States.
Article 269A: Levy and collection of goods and services tax in the course of inter-state trade or commerce.
Article 270: Taxes levied and distributed between the Union and the States.
Article 271: Surcharge on certain duties and taxes for purposes of the Union.
Article 272: [Repealed].
Article 273: Grants in lieu of export duty on jute and jute products.
Article 274: Prior recommendation of President required to Bills affecting taxation in which States are interested.
Article 275: Grants from the Union to certain States.
Article 276: Taxes on professions, trades, callings and employments.
Article 277: Savings.
Article 278: [Repealed].
Article 279: Calculation of “net proceeds”, etc.
Article 279A: Goods and Services Tax Council.
Article 280: Finance Commission.
Article 281: Recommendations of the Finance Commission.

Miscellaneous financial provisions
Article 282: Expenditure defrayable by the Union or a State out of its revenues.
Article 283: Custody, etc., of Consolidated Funds, Contingency Funds and moneys credited to the public accounts.
Article 284: Custody of suitors’ deposits and other moneys received by public servants and courts.
Article 285: Exemption of property of the Union from State taxation.
Article 286: Restrictions as to imposition of tax on the sale or purchase of goods.
Article 287: Exemption from taxes on electricity.
Article 288: Exemption from taxation by States in respect of water or electricity in certain cases.
Article 289: Exemption of property and income of a State from Union taxation.
Article 290: Adjustment in respect of certain expenses and pensions.
Article 290A: Annual payment to certain Devaswom Funds.
Article 291: [Repealed].

CHAPTER II: BORROWING
Article 292: Borrowing by the Government of India.
Article 293: Borrowing by States.

CHAPTER III: PROPERTY, CONTRACTS, RIGHTS, LIABILITIES, OBLIGATIONS AND SUITS
Article 294: Succession to property, assets, rights, liabilities and obligations in certain cases.
Article 295: Succession to property, assets, rights, liabilities and obligations in other cases.
Article 296: Property accruing by escheat or laps or as bona vacantia.
Article 297: Things of value within territorial waters or continental shelf and resources of the exclusive economic zone to vest in the Union.
Article 298: Power to carry on trade, etc.
Article 299: Contracts.
Article 300: Suits and proceedings.

CHAPTER IV: RIGHT TO PROPERTY
Article 300A: Persons not to be deprived of property save by authority of law.

PART XIII: TRADE, COMMERCE AND INTERCOURSE WITHIN THE TERRITORY OF INDIA
Article 301: Freedom of trade, commerce and intercourse.
Article 302: Power of Parliament to impose restrictions on trade, commerce and intercourse.
Article 303: Restrictions on the legislative powers of the Union and of the States with regard to trade and commerce.
Article 304: Restrictions on trade, commerce and intercourse among States.
Article 305: Saving of existing laws and laws providing for State monopolies.
Article 306: [Repealed].
Article 307: Appointment of authority for carrying out the purposes of articles 301 to 304.

PART XIV: SERVICES UNDER THE UNION AND THE STATES
CHAPTER I: SERVICES
Article 308: Interpretation.
Article 309: Recruitment and conditions of service of persons serving the Union or a State.
Article 310: Tenure of office of persons serving the Union or a State.
Article 311: Dismissal, removal or reduction in rank of persons employed in civil capacities under the Union or a State.
Article 312: All-India services.
Article 312A: Power of Parliament to vary or revoke conditions of service of officers of certain services.
Article 313: Transitional provisions.
Article 314: [Repealed]

CHAPTER II: PUBLIC SERVICE COMMISSIONS
Article 315: Public Service Commissions for the Union and for the States.
Article 316: Appointment and term of office of members.
Article 317: Removal and suspension of a member of a Public Service Commission.
Article 318: Power to make regulations as to conditions of service of members and staff of the Commission.
Article 319: Prohibition as to the holding of offices by members of Commission on ceasing to be such members.
Article 320: Functions of Public Service Commissions.
Article 321: Power to extend functions of Public Service Commissions.
Article 322: Expenses of Public Service Commissions.
Article 323: Reports of Public Service Commissions.

PART XIVA: TRIBUNALS
Article 323A: Administrative tribunals.
Article 323B: Tribunals for other matters.

PART XV: ELECTIONS
Article 324: Superintendence, direction and control of elections to be vested in an Election Commission.
Article 325: No person to be ineligible for inclusion in, or to claim to be included in a special, electoral roll on grounds of religion, race, caste or sex.
Article 326: Elections to the House of the People and to the Legislative Assemblies of States to be on the basis of adult suffrage.
Article 327: Power of Parliament to make provision with respect to elections to Legislatures.
Article 328: Power of Legislature of a State to make provision with respect to elections to such Legislature.
Article 329: Bar to interference by courts in electoral matters.
Article 329A: [Repealed].

PART XVI: SPECIAL PROVISIONS RELATING TO CERTAIN CLASSES
Article 330: Reservation of seats for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in the House of the People.
Article 331: Representation of the Anglo-Indian community in the House of the People.
Article 332: Reservation of seats for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in the Legislative Assemblies of the States.
Article 333: Representation of the Anglo-Indian community in the Legislative Assemblies of the States.
Article 334: Reservation of seats and special representation to cease after sixty years.
Article 335: Claims of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes to services and posts.
Article 336: Special provision for Anglo-Indian community in certain services.
Article 337: Special provision with respect to educational grants for the benefit of the Anglo-Indian Community.
Article 338: National Commission for Scheduled Castes.
Article 338A: National Commission for Scheduled Tribes.
Article 338A: National Commission for Backward Classes.
Article 339: Control of the Union over the Administration of Scheduled Areas and the welfare of Scheduled Tribes.
Article 340: Appointment of a Commission to investigate the conditions of backward classes.
Article 341: Scheduled Castes.
Article 342: Scheduled Tribes.
Article 342A: Socially and educationally backward classes.

PART XVII: OFFICIAL LANGUAGE
CHAPTER I: LANGUAGE OF THE UNION
Article 343:Official language of the Union.
Article 344: Commission and Committee of Parliament on official language.

CHAPTER II: REGIONAL LANGUAGES
Article 345: Official language or languages of a State.
Article 346: Official language for communication between one State and another or between a State and the Union.
Article 347: Special provision relating to language spoken by a section of the population of a State.

CHAPTER III: LANGUAGE OF THE SUPREME COURT, HIGH COURTS, ETC.
Article 348: Language to be used in the Supreme Court and in the High Courts and for Acts, Bills, etc.
Article 349: Special procedure for enactment of certain laws relating to language.

CHAPTER IV: SPECIAL DIRECTIVES
Article 350: Language to be used in representations for redress of grievances.
Article 350A: Facilities for instruction in mother-tongue at the primary stage.
Article 350B: Special Officer for linguistic minorities.
Article 351: Directive for development of the Hindi language.

PART XVIII: EMERGENCY PROVISIONS
Article 352: Proclamation of Emergency.
Article 353: Effect of Proclamation of Emergency.
Article 354: Application of provisions relating to distribution of revenues while a Proclamation of Emergency is in operation.
Article 355: Duty of the Union to protect States against external aggression and internal disturbance.
Article 356: Provisions in case of failure of constitutional machinery in States.
Article 357: Exercise of legislative powers under Proclamation issued under article 356.
Article 358: Suspension of provisions of article 19 during emergencies.
Article 359: Suspension of the enforcement of the rights conferred by Part III during emergencies.
Article 359A: [Repealed].
Article 360: Provisions as to financial emergency.

PART XIX: MISCELLANEOUS
Article 361: Protection of President and Governors and Rajprakukhs.
Article 361A: Protection of publication of proceedings of Parliament and State Legislatures.
Article 361B: Disqualification for appointment on remunerative political post.
Article 362: [Repealed].
Article 363: Bar to interference by courts in disputes arising out of certain treaties, agreements, etc.
Article 363A: Recognition granted to Rulers of Indian States to cease and privy purses to be abolished.
Article 364: Special provisions as to major ports and aerodromes.
Article 365: Effect of failure to comply with, or to give effect to, directions given by the Union.
Article 366: Definitions.
Article 367: Interpretation.

PART XX: AMENDMENT OF THE CONSTITUTION
Article 368: Power of Parliament to amend the Constitution and procedure therefor.

PART XXI: TEMPORARY, TRANSITIONAL AND SPECIAL PROVISIONS
Article 369: Temporary power to Parliament to make laws with respect to certain matters in the State List as if they were matters in the Concurrent List.
Article 370: Temporary provisions with respect to the State of Jammu and Kashmir.
Article 371: Special provision with respect to the States of Maharashtra and Gujarat.
Article 371A: Special provision with respect to the State of Nagaland.
Article 371B: Special provision with respect to the State of Assam.
Article 371C: Special provision with respect to the State of Manipur.
Article 371D: Special provisions with respect to the State of Andhra Pradesh.
Article 371E: Establishment of Central University in Andhra Pradesh.
Article 371F: Special provisions with respect to the State of Sikkim.
Article 371G: Special provision with respect to the State of Mizoram.
Article 371H: Special provision with respect to the State of Arunachal Pradesh.
Article 371-I: Special provision with respect to the State of Goa.
Article 371J: Special provision with respect to the State of Karnataka.
Article 372: Continuance in force of existing laws and their adaptation.
Article 372A: Power of the President to adapt laws.
Article 373: Power of President to make order in respect of persons under preventive detention in certain cases.
Article 374: Provisions as to Judges of the Federal Court and proceedings pending in the Federal Court or before His Majesty in Council.
Article 375: Courts, authorities and officers to continue to function subject to the provisions of the Constitution.
Article 376: Provisions as to Judges of High Courts.
Article 377: Provisions as to Comptroller and Auditor-General of India.
Article 378: Provisions as to Public Service Commissions.
Article 378A: Special provision as to the duration of Andhra Pradesh Legislative Assembly.
Article 379-391: [Repealed]
Article 392: Power of the President to remove difficulties.

PART XXII: SHORT TITLE, COMMENCEMENT, AUTHORITATIVE TEXT IN HINDI AND REPEALS
Article 393: Short title.
Article 394: Commencement.
Article 394A: Authoritative text in the Hindi language.
Article 395: Repeals.

Question: Whether Preamble is the part of the constitution?
Answer: In the case of Kesvanand Bharti vs. State of Kerala, the supreme has held that preamble is part of the constitution. Preamble is of extreme importance and the constitution should be read and interpreted in the light of grand and noble vision expressed in the preamble. However, two things should be noted:
The preamble is neither a source of power to legislature nor prohibition upon the powers of legislature.
It is not justiciable i.e. not enforceable in courts of law.

Question: Whether preamble can be amended?
Answer: Supreme Court has held that preamble can be amended subject to the condition that no amendment is done to the ‘ Basic structure’ of the constitution. The Preamble has been amended only once by the 42nd Constitutional Amendment act, which has added three new words- Socialistic, Secular and Integrity- to the preamble.

Question: Corporation when deemed to be state?
Answer: According to the judgment of Ajay hasia vs. Khalid Mujib
If the entire share capital is held by government.
Financial assistance is provided by the government to meet the entire expenditure.
When corporation enjoys a monopoly status.
When the state is having deep and pervasive control over the affairs of the corporation.
If the corporation is discharging public function.
Corporation acting as an agency instrumentality of the government. ( RD Shetty vs. IAA).
Stock Exchange is not a state because it is independent from the government control. (Satish nayak vs. Cochin Stock Exchange Ltd.)

In Prabhu Datt Vs. Union of India – Supreme Court held that right to know news and information about the functioning of the Govt., is included in the freedom of Press.

In Union of India Vs. Association for Democratic Reforms– Supreme Court held that people have right to know about the candidate before voting. Thus, the law preventing the Election Commission from asking for a candidate’s wealth, Assets, liabilities education and other such information is invalid.

In Tata Press Ltd. Vs. M.T.N.L. the Supreme Court held that commercial speech (Advertisement) is a part of freedom of speech and expression U/A 19(1) (a).

In Union of India V. Naveen Jindal, The Court held that “Flying National Flag” is fundamental Right U/A 19(1) (a)

Freedom of Silence – Right not to speak, In Bijoy emmanual Vs. State of Kerala.

Freedom of the Press - the freedom of press defined in the Indian Constitution U/A 19(1) (a) In Indian Express newspaper Vs. Union of India, the Court observed the expression “Freedom of the Press” has not been used in Article 19.

Pre-censorship Invalid – In Ramesh Thapper Vs. State of Madras.

In Maneka Gandhi v. Union of India. The Court has given the widest possible interpretation of Personal liberty. Thus Article 21 requires the following Conditions to be fulfilled before a Person is deprived of Personal liberty. 
There must me a valid law.
The law must provide a Procedure.
The Procedure must be (just, fair and Reasonable) ensuring Natural Justice.

Right to life includes within its ambit the right to live with Human dignity. The S.C. held that the right to life defines not only physical existence but the “quality of life.”

Judicial Pronouncement on right to Life & personal liberty:
Right to Travel abroad. (Satwant Singh v. Assistant Passport officer)
Right to livelihood. (D.K.Yadav v. J.M.A Industries)
Right to Shelter. (Chameli Singh v. State of U.P.)
Right to Privacy. (R.Raja Gopal v. State of T.N.)
In PUCL Vs. Union of India, the S.C. held that telephone tapping is a serious invasion of an individual’s right to Privacy which is part of the right to life and personal liberty.
Right to Health & Medical Assistance.
Right to die NOT A RIGHT TO LIFE
Protection of Ecology and Environmental Pollution
Right to education under Article 21A
Prisoner’s Right. The Court held that if the Prisoner died due to beating by Police Officer, his family is entitled to compensation.
Right to free Legal Aid
Right to speedy Trial
Right Against Handcuffing
Right against Delayed Execution.
Right to food
Right to Marriage. (Lata Singh v. State of U.P.)
Right to Reputation.
Right to Die. In case of Gian Kaur v. State of Punjab “The Constitutional Bench of Supreme Court held that “right to life” Under Article 21 does not include “right to die.”

Article 22 has two parts:-
First part deals with the ordinary law
Second part deals with the preventive detention

First part of Article 22: It deals with the detention under the ordinary law and provides for the following:
Right to be informed of the grounds of arrest.
Right to consult and be defended by a legal practitioner.
Right to be produced before magistrate within 24 hours, excluding the journey time.
Right to be released after 24 hours unless the Magistrate authorises further detention.
These safeguards are not available to an alien or a person arrested or detained under preventive detention.
Supreme Court has held that first part is not applicable in case of civil arrest, failure to pay income tax.

Second Part of Article 22: It deals with the detention under the preventive detention law. The protection is available to both citizen as well as alien and includes the following:
The detention of person cannot exceed three months unless an advisory board reports sufficient cause for extended detention.
The grounds of detention should be communicated to the detenue.
The detenue should be afforded an opportunity to make representation against the detention order.

TRADE, COMMERCE AND INTERCOURSE:
Meaning:- The word “trade” means “buying” or “selling” of goods while the term “Commerce” includes all forms of transportation such as by land, air or water. The term “intercourse” means movement of goods from one place to another place. The words trade commerce and intercourse covers all kinds of activities which are likely to come under the nature of commerce.
It is to be noted that Article 19 (1) (g) also guarantees to citizens the right to practice any profession or carry on any trade, business, etc. But while Article 19 (1) (g) confers a fundamental right on citizens to carry on trade, business etc. Article 301 confers only a statutory right. The right under Article 19 (1) (g) can only be claimed by citizens, but the right under Article 301 can be claimed by any one.

The word “free” in Article 301 – does not mean freedom from Laws or regulations. There is a clear distinction between laws interfering with freedom to carry out the activities constituting trade and law imposing rules of proper conduct or other restraints for the due and orderly manner of carrying out the activities. The distinction is known as regulations.

The word “regulation” has no fixed connotation. Its meaning differs according to the nature of the thing which it is applied. A purely regulatory and compensatory law cannot be regarded
as violative of the freedom of trade and commerce. Such laws are intended merely to regulate trade and commerce they tend, to facilitate, and not restrict or restrain freedom or trade. Thus, such measures as traffic regulations, licensing of vehicles, charging for the maintenance of roads, marketing and health regulations, price control, economic and social
planning prescribing minimum wages are purely regulatory measures., than a law which levies a tax or toll for the use of a road or bridge is not a barrier or burden on a trade but in
reality helps the free-flow of trade by enabling the provision of a mare convenient and less expensive route. Such compensatory taxes are no hindrance to any such freedom of trade so
long as they are within reasonable limits, if the amount of such taxes are unduly high it certainly would hamper trade.

In this connection the Court has pointed out that the distinction between “freedom” in Article 301 and “restriction” in Article 302 and 304 must be kept in mind, and that which, in reality
facilitates trade cannot be a restriction. While that which actually hampers trade will be a restriction.

“The Majority judgement in the Atiabari Tea Co’s Case read with a majority judgement in the Automobile’s case lead to the following principles relating of Article 301
1. Article 301 assures freedom of inter-State as well as intra-State trade, Commerce and intercourse.
2. Trade, Commerce and intercourse have the widest connotation and take in movement of goods and persons.
3. The freedom is not only from laws enacted in the exercise of the powers conferred by the legislative entries relating to trade and commerce or production, supply and distribution of goods, but also to all laws including tax laws. only those laws whose direct and immediate effect to inhibit or restrict freedom of trade or commerce will come with the mischief of Article 301. Laws which are merely regulatory or which impose purely compensatory taxes, and hence intended to facilitate freedom of trade, are outside the scope Article 301.
4. Restrictions on Trade and Commerce – Article 301 is subject to the restrictions imposed under Article 302 to 305.

Parliament’s Power to regulate trade and commerce in the Public interest – Article 302 authorizes Parliament to impose such restrictions on the freedom of trade, commerce or
inter course between one State and another or within any part of the territory of India as may be required in the public interest.
State‟s power to regulate trade and commerce – Article 304 (a) empowers the State to impose any tax on goods imported from other State if similar goods in the State are
subject to similar tax so as not to discriminate between goods so imported and goods manufactured or produced in the State.
Saving of existing laws – Article 305 saves existing laws and laws providing for State monopolies in so far as the President may by order otherwise direct. In Saghir Ahmad v. State of U.P. The Supreme Court raised the question whether an Act providing for State monopoly in a particular trade or business conflicts with the freedom of trade and commerce, guaranteed by Article 301, but left the question undecided. Article 19 was amended by the Constitution (first Amendment) Act in order to take out such State monopolies out of the purview of Article 19 (1)(g). But no corresponding provision was added to Article 305.
It appears from the judgement of the Supreme Court that in spite of such an amendment a law introducing such State monopoly might have to be justified before the courts as being “in the public interest” or as amounting to a “reasonable” under Article 306 (b) of the Constitution.

Borrowed Features of Indian Constitution from other Constitutions:
Bag of Borrowings:
This term is used to signify the Indian Constitution as a conglomeration of various provisions taken from different constitutions in the world. This criticism has been a big topic and many consider that our constitution is merely a copy or a modification of the provisions. The Constitution has borrowed provisions from the constitutions of the UK, USA, France, and USSR.

Following features are borrowed from United Kingdom (British) Constitution:
1. Parliamentary form of government
2. The idea of single citizenship
3. The idea of the Rule of law
4. Institution of Speaker and his role
5. Lawmaking or Legislative procedure
6. Nominal head of the state
7. Post of Prime Minister
8. More powerful lower house
9. Bicameral legislature
10. Cabinet system
11. Prerogative writ
12. Parliamentary privilege

Following features are borrowed from United States (U.S.A) Constitution:
1. Charter of Fundamental Rights, which is similar to the United States Bill of Rights
2. Federal structure of government
3. Power of Judicial Review and independence of the judiciary
4. Bill of Rights that is Fundamental rights
5. Written constitution
6. Preamble to the Constitution
7. Impeachment of the President
8. Post of the Vice President and his functions
9. The institution of the Supreme Court
10. Removal of Supreme Court and High courts judges
11. Electoral College
12. Independent judiciary and separation of powers
13. President as commander-in-chief of the armed forces
14. Equal protection under law

Following features are borrowed from Irish (Ireland) Constitution:
1. Constitutional enunciation of the directive principles of state policy
2. Nomination of members to the Rajya Sabha by the President
3. Method of election of the President

Following features are borrowed from French (France) Constitution:
1. Ideals of Liberty, Equality and Fraternity in the Preamble
2. The ideals of republic in the preamble

Following features are borrowed from Canadian (Canada) Constitution:
1. A quasi-federal form of government — a federal system with a strong central government
2. The idea of Residual Powers retained by the central government
3. Distribution of powers between the central and state governments
4. Appointment of Governor of states by Centre
5. Advisory jurisdiction of the Supreme Court

Following features are borrowed from Australian (Australia) Constitution:
1. The idea of the Concurrent list
2. Freedom of trade and commerce within the country and between the states
3. National legislative power to implement treaties, even on matters outside normal federal jurisdiction
4. Provision of Joint Session of the Parliament
5. Preamble terminology or language of the Preamble

Following features are borrowed from Soviet (Former USSR) Constitution :
1. The Planning Commission and Five-Year Plans to oversee economic development
2. Fundamental Duties under article 51-A
3. Ideals of justice (social, economic and political) in the preamble

Following features are borrowed from Weimar Republic (Germany) Constitution:
1. Suspension of fundamental rights during emergency

Following features are borrowed from South African (South African) Constitution:
1. Amendment procedure of the constitution
2. Election of members of Rajya Sabha

Following features are borrowed from Japanese (Japan) Constitution:
1. Procedure established by law
2. Laws on which the Supreme Court functions

Part I - consists of Articles 1 - 4 on the Union and its Territory

Part II - consists of Articles 5 - 11 on Citizenship.

Part III - consists of Articles 12 - 35 on Fundamental Rights.
1. Articles 14 - 18 on Right to Equality,
2. Articles 19 - 22 on Right to Freedom,
3. Articles 23 - 24 on Right against Exploitation,
4. Articles 25 - 28 on Right to Freedom of Religion,
5. Articles 29 - 31 on Cultural and Educational Rights,
6. Articles 32 - 35 on Right to Constitutional Remedies.

Part IV - consists of Articles 36 - 51 on Directive Principles of State Policy.

Part IV (A) - consists of Article 51A - Fundamental Duties of each citizen of India.

Part V - consists of Articles on the Union.
Part V  Chapter I - Articles 52 to 78 on The Executive.
1. Articles 52 - 73 on the President and Vice-President,
2. Articles 74 - 75 on Council of Ministers,
3. Articles 76 - Attorney General of India,
4. Articles 77 - 78 on the Conduct of Government Business

Part V  Chapter II - Articles 79 - 122 on Parliament.
1. Articles 79 - 88 on Constitution of Parliament,
2. Articles 89 - 98 on Officers of Parliament,
3. Articles 99 - 100 on Conduct of Business,
4. Articles 101 - 104 on Disqualification of members,
5. Articles 105 - 106 on Powers, privileges and Immunities of Parliament and its Members,
6. Articles 107 - 111 on Legislative Procedure,
7. Articles 112 - 117 on Procedure in Financial Matters,
8. Articles 118 - 122 on Procedure Generally

Part V  Chapter III - Article 123 on the Legislative Powers of the President.
Article 123 on Power of president to promulgate Ordinances during recess of Parliament

Part V Chapter IV - Articles 124 - 147 on The Union Judiciary.
Articles 124 - 147 Establishment and Constitution of Supreme Court

Part V Chapter V - Articles 148 - 151 on the Controller and Auditor-General of India.
Articles 148 - 151 on Duties and powers of Comptroller and Auditor-General.

Part VI - Articles on the States.
Part VI Chapter I - Article 152 on the General definition of a State of the Union of India
Article 152 - Exclusion of the state of Jammu and Kashmir from the general definition of a state of the Union of India.

Part VI Chapter II - Articles 153 - 167 on the Executive
1. Articles 153 - 162 on the Governor,
2. Articles 163 - 164 on the Council of Ministers,
3. Article 165 on the Advocate-General for the State.
4. Articles 166 - 167 on the Conduct of Government Business.

Part VI Chapter III - Articles 168 - 212 on The State Legislature.
1. Articles 168 - 177 General
2. Articles 178 - 187 on the Officers of the State Legislature,
3. Articles 188 - 189 on Conduct of Business,
4. Articles 190 - 193 on Disqualification of members,
5. Articles 194 - 195 on Powers, Privileges and Immunities Parliament and its Members,
6. Articles 196 - 201 on Legislative Procedure,
7. Articles 202 - 207 on Procedure in Financial Matters,
8. Articles 208 - 212 on Procedure Generally.

Part VI Chapter IV - Article 213 on the Legislative Powers of the Governor
Article 213 - Power of president to promulgate Ordinances during recess of Parliament

Part VI Chapter V - Articles 214 - 231 on The High Courts in the States.
Articles 214 - 231 on High Courts in the States

Part VI Chapter VI - Articles 233 - 237 on the Subordinate Courts.
Articles 232 - 237 on Subordinate Courts

Part VII - consists of Articles on States in the B part of the First schedule.
Article 238 Repealed, Replaced by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch.

Part VIII - consists of Articles on The Union Territories
Articles 239 - 242 Administration, creation of Council of Ministers and High Courts

Part IX - consists of Articles on the Panchayat system.
Articles 243 - 243O on the Gram Sabha and Panchayat system

Part IXA - consists of Articles on Municipalities.
Articles 243P - 243ZG on Municipalities

Part X - consists of Articles on the scheduled and Tribal Areas
Articles 244 - 244A on Administration, creation of Council of Ministers, and legislatures.

Part XI - consists of Articles on Relations between the Union and the States.
Part XI Chapter I - Articles 245 - 255 on the Distribution of Legislative Powers
Articles 245 - 255 on Distribution of Legislative Relations

Part XI Chapter II - Articles 256 - 263 on Administrative Relations
1. Articles 256 - 261 - General
2. Article 262 - on Disputes relating to waters.
3. Article 263 - on Co-ordination between States

Part XII - consists of Articles on Finance, Property, Contracts and Suits
Part XII Chapter I - Articles 264 - 291 on Finance
1. Articles 264 - 267 General
2. Articles 268 - 281 on Distribution Revenues between the Union and the States
3. Articles 282 - 291 on Miscellaneous Financial Provisions

Part XII Chapter II - Articles 292 - 293 on Borrowing
Articles 292 - 293 on Borrowing by States

Part XII Chapter III - Articles 294 - 300 on Property, Contracts, Right, Liabilities, Obligations and Suits
Articles 294 - 300 on Succession to property assets, liabilities, and obligations.

Part XII Chapter IV - Article 300A on the Right to Property
Article 300A - on Persons not to be deprived of property save by authority of law

Part XIII - consists of Articles on Trade and Commerce within the territory of India
1. Articles 301 - 305 on Freedom of Trade and Commerce, and the power of Parliament and States to impose Restrictions on the same.
2. Article 306 - Repealed - Replaced by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956
3. Article 307 - Appointment of authority for carrying out the purposes of articles 301 to 304.

Part XIV - consists of Articles on Services Under the Union and the States
Part XIV Chapter I - Articles 308 - 314 on Services
1. Articles 308 - 313 on Services
2. Article 314 - Repealed - Replaced by the Constitution (Twenty-eighth Amendment) Act, 1972,

Part XIV Chapter II - Articles 315 - 323 on the Public Service Commissions
Articles 315 - 323 on Public Service Commissions

Part XIVA - consists of Articles on Tribunals
Articles 323 A - 323 B

Part XV - consists of Articles on Elections
1. Articles 324 - 329 on Elections
2. Article 329A - Repealed - Replaced by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978.

Part XVI - consists of Articles on Special Provisions relating to certain Classes.
Articles 330 - 342 on Reservations

Part XVII - consists of Articles on Official Language
Part XVII Chapter I - Articles 343 - 344 on Language of the Union
Articles 343 - 344 Official Language of the Union

Part XVII Chapter II - Articles 345 - 347 on Regional Languages
Articles 345 - 347 on Language of the State

Part XVII Chapter III - Articles 348 - 349 on Language of the Supreme Court, High courts, Etc
Articles 348 - 349 on Language used in Supreme Court, High courts Etc

Part XVII Chapter IV - Articles 350 - 351 on Special Directives
1. Article 350 - on Language to be used in representations for redress of grievances.
2. Article 350A - on Facilities for instruction in mother-tongue at primary stage.
3. Article 350B - on provision for Special Officer for linguistic minorities.
4. Article 351 - on Directive for development of the Hindi language.

Part XVIII - consists of Articles on Emergency Provisions
1. Articles 352 - 359 on Emergency Provisions
2. Article 359A - Repealed - Replaced by the Constitution (Sixty-third Amendment) Act, 1989
3. Article 360 - on Provisions as to financial emergency.

Part XIX - Miscellaneous
1. Articles 361 - 361A - Miscellaneous
2. Article 362 - Repealed - Replaced by the Constitution (Twenty-sixth Amendment) Act, 1971,
3. Articles 363 - 367 - Miscellaneous.

Part XX - consists of Articles on Amendment of the Constitution
Articles 368 on the Power of parliament to amend the constitution and procedure therefore

Part XXI - consists of Articles on Temporary, Transitional and Special Provisions
1. Articles 369 - 378A on Temporary, Transitional and Special Provisions
2. Article 379 - 391 - Repealed - Replaced by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956
3. Article 392 - on the Power of the President to remove difficulties.

Part XXII consists of Articles on short title, date of commencement, Authoritative text in Hindi and Repeals.
Articles 393 - 395 Commencement, authoritative text in Hindi and repeals

Schedule of Indian Constitution:
First Schedule: List of the States and Union Territories in list I & List II
Second Schedule: Consists of 5 Parts A to E. Provision & Salary of President, Governors, Chief Judges, Judges Of High Court and Supreme Court, Comptroller and Auditor General.
Third Schedule: Forms of Oaths and Affirmations.
Fourth Schedule: Allocation of seats for each State and Union Territory, in the Council of States.
Fifth Schedule: Administration and control of Scheduled Areas.
Sixth Schedule: Provisions for administration of Tribal Area in Assam, Meghalaya, Tripura, Mizoram
Seventh Schedule: Gives allocation of powers and functions between Union & States. It contains 3 lists namely, Union List: 97 Subjects, States List: 66 subjects and Concurrent List: 47 subjects.
Eighth Schedule: 22 languages recognized by the Constitution : 1. Assamese, 2. Bengali, 3. Gujarati, 4. Hindi, 5. Kannada, 6. Kashmiri, 7. Malayalam, 8. Marathi, 9. Oriya, 10. Punjabi, 11. Sanskrit, 12. Sindhi, 13. Tamil, 14. Telugu, 15, Urdu, 16. Konkani, 17. Manipuri, 18. Nepali. 19. Bodo, 20. Dongri 21. Maithili 22. Santhali
Ninth Schedule: Contains acts & orders related to land tenure, land tax, railways, and industries.
Tenth Schedule: It contains the Anti-defection Act.
Eleventh Schedule: 73rd amendment in 1992.Contains provisions of Panchayati Raj.
Twelfth Schedule: 74thamendment in 1992.Contains provisions of Municipal Corporation.

Amendments in the Constitution:
The first Amendment Act 1951: Articles 15, 19, 85, 87, 174, 176, 341, 342, and 376 were amended and Articles 31A and 3IB inserted and Ninth Schedule was added.

24th Amendment Act, 1971: It affirmed the power of the Parliament to amend any part of the Constitution.
After this amendment, the President is bound to assent to Con stitution Amendment Bill. Education was transferred to the Concurrent List by this amendment.

31st Amendment Act, 1973: Increased the elective strength of the Lok Sabha from 525 to 545. Under the Act, the upper limit of representatives of the States goes up from 500 to 525 and that of the Union Territories decreases from 25 to 20.

36th Amendment Act, 1975: Sikkim became the 22nd State of the Indian Union.

37th Amendment Act, 1975: Parliament on April 26, 1975, to provide for a Legislative Assembly and a Council of Ministers to Arunachal Pradesh.

39th Amendment Act, 1975: The Bill was passed by the Lok Sabha and received Presidential assent.The Act places beyond challenge in courts the election to Parliament of a person holding the office of Prime Minister or Speaker and the election of President and Vice-President.

40th Amendment Act, 1976: This Amendment has a three-fold objective: (1) It places beyond challenge in courts some major Central laws (2) It gives similar protection to several State enactments, mostly relating to land legislation, by including them in the Ninth Schedule of the Constitution; and (3) It provides that the limits of the territorial waters, the Continental Shelf, the Exclusive Economic Zone and the maritime zones of India shall be specified from time to time by law made by Parliament.

42nd Amendment Act, 1976: It was enacted during the period of internal emergency. It was passed by Parliament on November 11, 1976 and received Presidential assent on December 18, 1976.

The 42nd Amendment established beyond doubt the supremacy of Parliament over the other wings of Government; gave the Directive Principles precedence over the Fundamental Rights; enumerated for the first time a set of ten Fundamental Duties. It further imposed limits on the power and jurisdiction of the judiciary; raised the term of the Lok Sabha and the Vidhan Sabha from five to six years; authorised the use of Central armed forces in any State to deal with law and order problems, made the President bound by the advice of the Council of Ministers and envisaged the establishment of administrative tribunals for service matters of Government employees and also other tribunals for economic offences. The Act also clearly laid down that no Constitutional Amendment could be questioned in any court of law.

43rd Amendment Act, 1978: It received the Presidential assent on April 13, 1978. This Act repeals the obnoxious provisions of the Constitution (42nd Amendment) Act passed during the Emergency. It restores civil liberties by deleting Article 3ID which gave powers to Parliament to curtail even legitimate trade union activity under the guise of legislation for the prevention of anti-national activities. The new law, which was ratified by more than half of the States in accordance with the Constitution, also restores legislative powers to the States to
make appropriate provision for anti-national activities consistent with the Fundamental Rights. Under the Act, the judiciary has also been restored to its rightful place. The Supreme Court will now have power to invalidate State laws, a power taken away by the 42nd Amendment Act. The High Courts will also be able to go into the question of constitutional validity of Central laws thereby enabling persons living in distant places to obtain speedy justice without having to come to the Supreme Court.

44th Amendment Act, 1978: The Act removes major distortions in the Constitution introduced during the Emergency. The duration of the Lok Sabha and State Legislative Assemblies has been reduced from six to five years—the normal term which was extended during the Emergency under the 42nd Amendment to achieve some political purposes. The Right to Property ceases to be a Fundamental Right and becomes only a legal right. Any proclamation of Emergency need henceforward be issued by the President only after receiving the
advice of the Cabinet as a whole in writing. The President will not be called upon to act on the basis of advice by the Prime Minister on his own without consulting his Cabinet. Other safeguards provide that the proclamation will have to be adopted by a two-thirds majority of the members of both Houses of Parliament within a month. Safeguards against future subversion of the Constitution for establishing an authoritarian regime. It contains provisions which are designed to make it impossible to impose the kind of emergency the
country had experienced for 19 months.

45th Amendment Act, 1980: Reservation of seats for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes in Parliament and the State Assemblies and the representation of Anglo-Indians by nomination for a further period of 10 years.

46th Amendment Bill, 1982: It seeks to authorise the government to prepare an authoritative text of the Constitution, in Hindi.

52nd Amendment Act, 1985: The Act has made defection to another party, after elections illegal. Any member defecting to another party after elections will be disqualified from being Member of Parliament or State Legislature.

53rd Amendment Act, 1986: It confers Statehood on Mizoram and ensures against unnecessary interference by the Central Government with the laws relating to spheres of social relationship and community conduct applicable to Mizoram.

54th Amendment Act, 1986: It enhances the salaries of Judges of High Courts and Supreme Court of India. The salary of Chief Justice of India will be Rs 10,000; Chief Justice of High Courts Rs 9000; Judges of Supreme Court Rs 9000; and Judges of High Courts Rs 8000.

55th Amendment Act, 1987: It grants Statehood to Arunachal Pradesh which consequently became the 24th State of the Indian Union.

56th Amendment Act, 1987: It confers Statehood on Goa and forms a new Union Territory of Daman and Diu. Goa thus became the 25th State of the Indian Republic.

57th Amendment Act, 1987: It made a special provision for the setting up of the new State of Goa. Consequently Daman and Diu were separated from the former to form a Union Territory.

58th Amendment Act, 1988: It provides for special arrangements with regard to reservation of seats for Scheduled Tribes in the States of Arunachal Pradesh, Nagaland, Mizoram and Meghalaya. By amending Article 322 the adjustment of seats has been frozen until 2000 A.D.

59th Amendment Act, 1988: It empowered the Central Government to impose Emergency in Punjab when deemed necessary. Under the amendment, President’s rule can be extended upto three years. Earlier maximum period was two years.

61st Amendment Act, 1989: It lowered the voting age from 21 to 18.

62nd Amendment Act, 1989: It provided for the extension by another 10 years of reservation of seats in the Parliament and State Assemblies for the Scheduled Castes and Tribes and reservation for Anglo Indian community by nomination.
 
66th Amendment Act, 1990: To bring land reforms within the purview of 9th Schedule of the Constitution.

69th Amendment Act, 1991: Delhi made National Capital Region. The Act also made provision for Legislative assembly and a council of ministers for Delhi.

70th Amendment Act, 1992: Before this act was made Article 54 relating to the election of the President provided for an electoral college consisting only of the elected members of Parliament as well as the legislative assemblies of the States (not of Union Territories). The amendment provide for inclusion of members of legislature of Pondicherry and Delhi.

71st Amendment Act, 1992: The act amends the 8th Schedule to the Constitution to include Konkani, Manipuri and Nepali Languages in the 8th Schedule of the Constitution.

72nd Amendment Act, 1992: To make temporary provision for the determination of the number of seats reserved for the Scheduled Tribes in the State assembly of Tripura, until the re-adjustment of seats is made on the basis of the first census after the year 2000 under article 170 of the Constitution.

73rd Amendment Act, 1992: To ensure direct election to all seats in Panchayats; to reserve seats for SCs and STs in proportion to their population; and for reservation of not less than one third of the seats in Panchayats for women.

74th Amendment Act, 1992: was made to ensure direct election to all seats in Nagarpalikas and Municipalities.

75th Amendment Act 1994: It provides for setting up of State-level Rent Tribunals to exclude the jurisdiction of all courts, except that of the Supreme Court, under Article 136 of the Constitution.

76th Amendment Act, 1994: It relates to the Reservation of Seats in Educational Institutes and of appointments or posts in the Services under a State, for Backward Classes, Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes. The Supreme Court had ruled on November 16, 1992, that the total reservations under Article 16(40) of the Constitution should not exceed 50 per cent.

77th Amendment Act, 1995: According to this Act, the Government have decided to continue the existing policy of reservation in promotion for the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes.

78th Amendment Act, 1995: It includes land reform laws in the Ninth Schedule so that they cannot be challenged before the courts.

79th Amendment Act, 1999: It extends the reservation of seats for SC, ST and Anglo-Indians in the Lok Sabha and Legislative Assemblies for next 10 years.

80th Amendment Act, 2000: It deals with an alternative scheme for sharing taxes between the Union and the States.

81st Amendment Act, 2000: It provides that the unfilled vacancies of a year reserved for SC/ST kept for being filled up in a year as per Article 16, shall be considered separately for filling vacancies in the succeeding year and the previous list will not be considered for filling the 50% quota of the respective year.

82nd Amendment Act, 2000: It provides that nothing in the Article 355 shall prevent the State from making any provisions in favour of the members of SC/ST for relaxation in qualifying marks with respect to examination/job/promotion.

83rd Amendment Act, 2000: The Act amended Article 243 M to provide that no reservation in Panchayats be made in favour of SC/ST in Arunachal Pradesh where the whole population is tribal.

86th Amendment Act, 2002: Provides Right to Education until the age of 14 and early childhood care until the age of 6.

89th Amendment Act, 2003: The National Commission for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes was bifurcated into The National Commission for Scheduled Castes and The National Commission for Scheduled Tribes.

91st Amendment Act, 2004: Restrict the size of council of ministers to 15% of legislative members and to strengthen Anti Defection laws. Amended articles 75 and 164. Insert article 361B. Amended schedule 10.

97thAmendment Act, 2012: The amendment objective is to encourage economic activities of cooperatives which in turn help progress of rural India. It is expected to not only ensure autonomous and democratic functioning of cooperatives, but also the accountability of the management to the members and other stakeholders

98th Amendment Act, 2013: To empower the Governor of Karnataka to take steps to develop the Hyderabad-Karnataka Region instered Article 371J in the Constitution

Amendments in the Constitution of India:
As of October 2021, there have been 105 amendments of the Constitution of India since it was first enacted in 1950. 
There are three types of amendments to the Constitution of India of which second and third type of amendments are governed by Article 368. 
The first type of amendments includes that can be passed by "simple majority" in each house of the Parliament of India.
The second type of amendments includes that can be effected by the parliament by a prescribed "special majority" in each house; and
The third type of amendments includes those that require, in addition to such "special majority" in each house of the parliament, ratification by at least one half of the State Legislatures.

The 1st Amendment 15, 19, 85, 87, 174, 176, 341, 342, 372 and 376.
Insert articles 31A and 31B.
Insert schedule 9.
The objective of 1st Amendment was: Added special provision for the advancement of any socially and educationally backward classes or for the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes (SCs and STs). To fully secure the constitutional validity of zamindari abolition laws and to place reasonable restriction on freedom of speech. A new constitutional device, called Schedule 9 introduced to protect against laws that are contrary to the Constitutionally guaranteed fundamental rights. These laws encroach upon property rights, freedom of speech and equality before law. 
The 1st Amendment is enforced since: 18 June 1951
The Prime Minster at the time of 1st Amendment was: Jawaharlal Nehru 
The President at the time of 1st Amendment was: Rajendra Prasad 

The 2nd Amendment Amend article 81(1)(b).
The objective of 2nd Amendment was: Removed the upper population limit for a parliamentary constituency by amending Article 81(1)(b). 
The 2nd Amendment is enforced since: 1 May 1953 
The Prime Minster at the time of 2nd Amendment was: Jawaharlal Nehru 
The President at the time of 2nd Amendment was: Rajendra Prasad 

The 3rd Amendment Amend schedule 7.
The objective of 3rd Amendment was: Re-enacted entry 33 of the Concurrent List in the Seventh Schedule with relation to include trade and commerce in, and the production, supply and distribution of four classes of essential commodities, viz., foodstuffs, including edible oil seeds and oils; cattle fodder, including oilcakes and other concentrates; raw cotton whether ginned or unginned, and cotton seeds; and raw jute. 
The 3rd Amendment is enforced since: 22 February 1955 
The Prime Minster at the time of 3rd Amendment was: Jawaharlal Nehru 
The President at the time of 3rd Amendment was: Rajendra Prasad 

The 4th Amendment Amend articles 31, 31A, and 305.
Amend schedule 9.
The objective of 4th Amendment was: Restrictions on property rights and inclusion of related bills in Schedule 9 of the constitution. 
The 4th Amendment is enforced since: 27 April 1955 
The Prime Minster at the time of 4th Amendment was: Jawaharlal Nehru 
The President at the time of 4th Amendment was: Rajendra Prasad 

The 5th Amendment Amend article 3.
The objective of 5th Amendment was: Empowered the President to prescribe a time limit for a State Legislature to convey its views on proposed Central laws relating to the formation of new States and alteration of areas, boundaries or names of existing States. Also permitted the President to extend the prescribed limit, and prohibited any such bill from being introduced in Parliament until after the expiry of the prescribed or extended period. 
The 5th Amendment is enforced since: 24 December 1955 
The Prime Minster at the time of 5th Amendment was: Jawaharlal Nehru 
The President at the time of 5th Amendment was: Rajendra Prasad 

The 6th Amendment Amend articles 269 and 286.
Amend schedule 7.
The objective of 6th Amendment was: Amend the Union List and State List with respect to raising of taxes. 
The 6th Amendment is enforced since: 11 September 1956 
The Prime Minster at the time of 6th Amendment was: Jawaharlal Nehru 
The President at the time of 6th Amendment was: Rajendra Prasad 

The 7th Amendment Amend articles 1, 3, 49, 80, 81, 82, 131, 153, 158, 168, 170, 171, 216, 217, 220, 222, 224, 230, 231 and 232.
Insert articles 258A, 290A, 298, 350A, 350B, 371, 372A and 378A.
Amend part 8.
Amend schedules 1, 2, 4 and 7.
The objective of 7th Amendment was: Reorganisation of states on linguistic lines, abolition of Class A, B, C, D states and introduction of Union territories. 
The 7th Amendment is enforced since: 1 November 1956 
The Prime Minster at the time of 7th Amendment was: Jawaharlal Nehru 
The President at the time of 7th Amendment was: Rajendra Prasad 

The 8th Amendment Amend article 334.
The objective of 8th Amendment was: Extended the period of reservation of seats for the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes and Anglo-Indians in the Lok Sabha and the State Legislative Assemblies till 1970. 
The 8th Amendment is enforced since: 5 January 1960 
The Prime Minster at the time of 8th Amendment was: Jawaharlal Nehru 
The President at the time of 8th Amendment was: Rajendra Prasad 

The 9th Amendment Amend schedule 1.
The objective of 9th Amendment was: Minor adjustments to territory of Indian Union consequent to agreement with Pakistan for settlement of disputes by demarcation of border villages, etc. 
The 9th Amendment is enforced since: 28 December 1960 
The Prime Minster at the time of 9th Amendment was: Jawaharlal Nehru 
The President at the time of 9th Amendment was: Rajendra Prasad 

The 10th Amendment Amend article 240.
Amend schedule 1.
The objective of 10th Amendment was: Incorporation of Dadra and Nagar Haveli as a Union Territory, consequent to acquisition from Portugal. 
The 10th Amendment is enforced since: 11 August 1961 
The Prime Minster at the time of 10th Amendment was: Jawaharlal Nehru 
The President at the time of 10th Amendment was: Rajendra Prasad 

The 11th Amendment Amend articles 66 and 71.
The objective of 11th Amendment was: Election of Vice President by Electoral College consisting of members of both Houses of Parliament, instead of election by a Joint Sitting of Parliament. Indemnify the President and Vice President Election procedure from challenge on grounds of existence of any vacancies in the electoral college. 
The 11th Amendment is enforced since: 19 December 1961 
The Prime Minster at the time of 11th Amendment was: Jawaharlal Nehru 
The President at the time of 11th Amendment was: Rajendra Prasad 

The 12th Amendment Amend article 240.
Amend schedule 1.
The objective of 12th Amendment was: Incorporation of Goa, Daman and Diu as a Union Territory, consequent to acquisition from Portugal. 
The 12th Amendment is enforced since: 20 December 1961 
The Prime Minster at the time of 12th Amendment was: Jawaharlal Nehru 
The President at the time of 12th Amendment was: Rajendra Prasad 

The 13th Amendment Amend article 170.
Insert new article 371A.
The objective of 13th Amendment was: Formation of State of Nagaland, with special protection under Article 371A. 
The 13th Amendment is enforced since: 1 December 1962 
The Prime Minster at the time of 13th Amendment was: Jawaharlal Nehru 
The President at the time of 13th Amendment was: Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan 

The 14th Amendment Amend articles 81 and 240.
Insert article 239A.
Amend schedules 1 and 4.
The objective of 14th Amendment was: Incorporation of Pondicherry into the Union of India and creation of Legislative Assemblies for Himachal Pradesh, Tripura, Manipur and Goa. 
The 14th Amendment is enforced since: 28 December 1962 
The Prime Minster at the time of 14th Amendment was: Jawaharlal Nehru 
The President at the time of 14th Amendment was: Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan 

The 15th Amendment Amend articles 124, 128, 217, 222, 224, 226, 297, 311 and 316.
Insert article 224A.
Amend schedule 7.
The objective of 15th Amendment was: Raise retirement age of High Court judges from 60 to 62 and other minor amendments for rationalising interpretation of rules regarding judges etc. 
The 15th Amendment is enforced since: 5 October 1963 
The Prime Minster at the time of 15th Amendment was: Jawaharlal Nehru 
The President at the time of 15th Amendment was: Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan 

The 16th Amendment Amend articles 19, 84 and 173.
Amend schedule 3.
The objective of 16th Amendment was: Make it obligatory for seekers of public office to swear their allegiance to the Indian Republic and prescribe the various obligatory templates. 
The 16th Amendment is enforced since: 5 October 1963 
The Prime Minster at the time of 16th Amendment was: Jawaharlal Nehru 
The President at the time of 16th Amendment was: Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan 

The 17th Amendment Amend article 31A.
Amend schedule 9.
The objective of 17th Amendment was: To secure the constitutional validity of acquisition of Estates and place land acquisition laws in Schedule 9 of the constitution. 
The 17th Amendment is enforced since: 20 June 1964 
The Prime Minster at the time of 17th Amendment was: Jawaharlal Nehru 
The President at the time of 17th Amendment was: Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan 

The 18th Amendment Amend article 3.
The objective of 18th Amendment was: Technical Amendment to include Union Territories in Article 3 and hence permit reorganisation of Union Territories. 
The 18th Amendment is enforced since: 27 August 1966 
The Prime Minster at the time of 18th Amendment was: Lal Bahadur Shastri 
The President at the time of 18th Amendment was: Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan 

The 19th Amendment Amend article 324.
The objective of 19th Amendment was: Abolish Election Tribunals and enable trial of election petitions by regular High Courts. 
The 19th Amendment is enforced since: 11 December 1966 
The Prime Minster at the time of 19th Amendment was: Lal Bahadur Shastri 
The President at the time of 19th Amendment was: Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan 

The 20th Amendment Insert article 233A.
The objective of 20th Amendment was: Indemnify & validate judgments, decrees, orders and sentences passed by judges and to validate the appointment, posting, promotion and transfer of judges barring a few who were not eligible for appointment under article 233. Amendment needed to overcome the effect of judgment invalidating appointments of certain judges in the state of Uttar Pradesh. 
The 20th Amendment is enforced since: 22 December 1966 
The Prime Minster at the time of 20th Amendment was: Lal Bahadur Shastri 
The President at the time of 20th Amendment was: Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan 

The 21st Amendment Amend schedule 8.
The objective of 21st Amendment was: Include Sindhi as an official language. 
The 21st Amendment is enforced since: 10 April 1967 
The Prime Minster at the time of 21st Amendment was: Indira Gandhi 
The President at the time of 21st Amendment was: Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan 

The 22nd Amendment Amend article 275.
Insert articles 244A and 371B.
The objective of 22nd Amendment was: Provision to form Autonomous states within the State of Assam. 
The 22nd Amendment is enforced since: 25 September 1969 
The Prime Minster at the time of 22nd Amendment was: Indira Gandhi 
The President at the time of 22nd Amendment was: V. V. Giri 

The 23rd Amendment Amend articles 330, 332, 333 and 334.
The objective of 23rd Amendment was: Discontinued reservation of seats for the Scheduled Tribes in Nagaland, both in the Lok Sabha and the State Legislative Assembly and stipulated that not more than one Anglo-Indian could be nominated by the Governor to any State Legislative Assembly. Extend reservation for SCs and STs and Anglo Indian members in the Lok Sabha and State Assemblies for another ten years, i.e. up to 1980. 
The 23rd Amendment is enforced since: 23 January 1970 
The Prime Minster at the time of 23rd Amendment was: Indira Gandhi 
The President at the time of 23rd Amendment was: V. V. Giri 

The 24th Amendment Amend articles 13 and 368.
The objective of 24th Amendment was: Enable parliament to dilute fundamental rights through amendments to the constitution. 
The 24th Amendment is enforced since: 5 November 1971 
The Prime Minster at the time of 24th Amendment was: Indira Gandhi 
The President at the time of 24th Amendment was: V. V. Giri 

The 25th Amendment Amend article 31.
Insert article 31C.
The objective of 25th Amendment was: Restrict property rights and compensation in case the state takes over private property. 
However, the Supreme Court quashed a part of Article 31C (4) to the extent it took away the power of judicial review. This was done in the landmark case of Kesavananda Bharati v. State of Kerala (1973) 4 SCC 225 which for the first time enunciated the Basic structure doctrine. 
The 25th Amendment is enforced since: 8 December 1971 
The Prime Minster at the time of 25th Amendment was: Indira Gandhi 
The President at the time of 25th Amendment was: V. V. Giri 

The 26th Amendment Amend article 366.
Insert article 363A.
Remove articles 291 and 362.
The objective of 26th Amendment was: Abolition of privy purse paid to former rulers of princely states which were incorporated into the Indian Republic. 
The 26th Amendment is enforced since: 28 December 1971 
The Prime Minster at the time of 26th Amendment was: Indira Gandhi 
The President at the time of 26th Amendment was: V. V. Giri 

The 27th Amendment Amend articles 239A and 240.
Insert articles 239B and 371C.
The objective of 27th Amendment was: Reorganisation of Mizoram into a Union Territory with a legislature and council of ministers. 
The 27th Amendment is enforced since: (i)30 December 1971 & (ii) 15 February 1972 [6] 
The Prime Minster at the time of 27th Amendment was: Indira Gandhi 
The President at the time of 27th Amendment was: V. V. Giri 

The 28th Amendment Insert article 312A.
Remove article 314.
The objective of 28th Amendment was: Rationalise Civil Service rules to make it uniform across those appointed prior to Independence and post independence. 
The 28th Amendment is enforced since: 29 August 1972 
The Prime Minster at the time of 28th Amendment was: Indira Gandhi 
The President at the time of 28th Amendment was: V. V. Giri 

The 29th Amendment Amend schedule 9.
The objective of 29th Amendment was: Place land reform acts and amendments to these act under Schedule 9 of the constitution. 
The 29th Amendment is enforced since: 9 June 1972 
The Prime Minster at the time of 29th Amendment was: Indira Gandhi 
The President at the time of 29th Amendment was: V. V. Giri 

The 30th Amendment Amend article 133.
The objective of 30th Amendment was: Change the basis for appeals in Supreme Court of India in case of Civil Suits from value criteria to one involving substantial question of law. 
The 30th Amendment is enforced since: 9 June 1972 
The Prime Minster at the time of 30th Amendment was: Indira Gandhi 
The President at the time of 30th Amendment was: V. V. Giri 

The 31st Amendment Amend articles 81, 330 and 332.
The objective of 31st Amendment was: Increase size of Parliament from 525 to 545 seats. Increased seats going to the new states formed in North East India and minor adjustment consequent to 1971 Delimitation exercise. 
The 31st Amendment is enforced since: 17 October 1973 
The Prime Minster at the time of 31st Amendment was: Indira Gandhi 
The President at the time of 31st Amendment was: V. V. Giri 

The 32nd Amendment Amend article 371.
Insert articles 371D and 371E.
Amend schedule 7.
The objective of 32nd Amendment was: Protection of regional rights in Telangana and Andhra regions of State of Andhra Pradesh. 
Supreme Court in P. Sambamurthy v. State of Andhra Pradesh 1987 SCC (1) 362 held clause (3) and (5) along with its Proviso of Article 371D as unconstitutional and void. It was found to be violative of basic structure doctrine, against the concept of justice and the principle of the rule of law.
The 32nd Amendment is enforced since: 1 July 1974 
The Prime Minster at the time of 32nd Amendment was: Indira Gandhi 
The President at the time of 32nd Amendment was: V. V. Giri 

The 33rd Amendment Amend articles 101 and 190.
The objective of 33rd Amendment was: Prescribes procedure for resignation by members of parliament and state legislatures and the procedure for verification and acceptance of resignation by house speaker. 
The 33rd Amendment is enforced since: 19 May 1974 
The Prime Minster at the time of 33rd Amendment was: Indira Gandhi 
The President at the time of 33rd Amendment was: V. V. Giri 

The 34th Amendment Amend schedule 9.
The objective of 34th Amendment was: Place land reform acts and amendments to these act under Schedule 9 of the constitution. 
The 34th Amendment is enforced since: 7 September 1974 
The Prime Minster at the time of 34th Amendment was: Indira Gandhi 
The President at the time of 34th Amendment was: Fakhruddin Ali Ahmed 

The 35th Amendment Amend articles 80 and 81.
Insert article 2A.
Insert schedule 10.
The objective of 35th Amendment was: Terms and Conditions for the Incorporation of Sikkim into the Union of India. 
The 35th Amendment is enforced since: 1 March 1975 
The Prime Minster at the time of 35th Amendment was: Indira Gandhi 
The President at the time of 35th Amendment was: Fakhruddin Ali Ahmed 

The 36th Amendment Amend articles 80 and 81.
Insert article 371F.
Remove article 2A.
Amend schedules 1 and 4.
Remove schedule 10.
The objective of 36th Amendment was: Formation of Sikkim as a State within the Indian Union. 
The 36th Amendment is enforced since: 26 April 1975 
The Prime Minster at the time of 36th Amendment was: Indira Gandhi 
The President at the time of 36th Amendment was: Fakhruddin Ali Ahmed 

The 37th Amendment Amend articles 239A and 240.
The objective of 37th Amendment was: Formation of Arunachal Pradesh legislative assembly. 
The 37th Amendment is enforced since: 3 May 1975 
The Prime Minster at the time of 37th Amendment was: Indira Gandhi 
The President at the time of 37th Amendment was: Fakhruddin Ali Ahmed 

The 38th Amendment Amend articles 123, 213, 239B, 352, 356, 359 and 360.
The objective of 38th Amendment was: Enhances the powers of President and Governors to pass ordinances. 
The 38th Amendment is enforced since: 1 August 1975 
The Prime Minster at the time of 38th Amendment was: Indira Gandhi 
The President at the time of 38th Amendment was: Fakhruddin Ali Ahmed 

The 39th Amendment Amend articles 71 and 329.
Insert article 329A.
Amend schedule 9.
The objective of 39th Amendment was: Amendment designed to negate the judgement of Allahabad HC in State of Uttar Pradesh v. Raj Narain 1975 SCR (3) 333 invalidating PM Indira Gandhi's election to parliament. Amendment placed restrictions on judicial scrutiny of post of Prime Minister.
Later, clauses (4) and (5) of Article 329A were struck down by the Supreme Court in Indira Nehru Gandhi v. Raj Narain 1976 (2) SCR 347, for being in violation of basic structure. 
The 39th Amendment is enforced since: 10 August 1975 
The Prime Minster at the time of 39th Amendment was: Indira Gandhi 
The President at the time of 39th Amendment was: Fakhruddin Ali Ahmed 

The 40th Amendment Amend article 297.
Amend schedule 9.
The objective of 40th Amendment was: Enable Parliament to make laws with respect to Exclusive Economic Zone and vest the mineral wealth with Union of India. 
Place land reform & other acts and amendments to these act under Schedule 9 of the constitution. 
The 40th Amendment is enforced since: 27 May 1976 
The Prime Minster at the time of 40th Amendment was: Indira Gandhi 
The President at the time of 40th Amendment was: Fakhruddin Ali Ahmed 

The 41st Amendment Amend article 316.
The objective of 41st Amendment was: Raise Retirement Age Limit of Chairmen and Members of Joint Public Service Commissions and State Public Service Commissions from sixty to sixty two. 
The 41st Amendment is enforced since: 7 September 1976 
The Prime Minster at the time of 41st Amendment was: Indira Gandhi 
The President at the time of 41st Amendment was: Fakhruddin Ali Ahmed 

The 42nd Amendment Amend articles 31, 31C, 39, 55, 74, 77, 81, 82, 83, 100, 102, 103, 105, 118, 145, 150, 166, 170, 172, 189, 191, 192, 194, 208, 217, 225, 226, 227, 228, 311, 312, 330, 352, 353, 356, 357, 358, 359, 366, 368 and 371F.
Insert articles 31D, 32A, 39A, 43A, 48A, 131A, 139A, 144A, 226A, 228A and 257A.
Insert parts 4A and 14A.
Amend schedule 7.
The objective of 42nd Amendment was: Amendment passed during internal emergency by Indira Gandhi. Provides for curtailment of fundamental rights, imposes fundamental duties and changes to the basic structure of the constitution by making India a "Sovereign Socialist Secular Democratic Republic". 
However, the Supreme Court, in Minerva Mills v. Union of India 1980 SCC (3) 625, quashed the amendments to Articles 31C and 368 as it was in contravention with the basic structure of the Constitution. 
The 42nd Amendment is enforced since: 3 January, 1 February & 1 April 1977[6] 
The Prime Minster at the time of 42nd Amendment was: Indira Gandhi 
The President at the time of 42nd Amendment was: Fakhruddin Ali Ahmed 

The 43rd Amendment Amend articles 145, 226, 228 and 366.
Remove articles 31D, 32A, 131A, 144A, 226A and 228A.
The objective of 43rd Amendment was: Amendment passed after revocation of internal emergency in the Country. Repeals some of the more 'Anti-Freedom' amendments enacted through Amendment Bill 42. 
The 43rd Amendment is enforced since: 13 April 1978 
The Prime Minster at the time of 43rd Amendment was: Morarji Desai 
The President at the time of 43rd Amendment was: Neelam Sanjiva Reddy 

The 44th Amendment Amend articles 19, 22, 30, 31A, 31C, 38, 71, 74, 77, 83, 103, 105, 123, 132, 133, 134, 139A, 150, 166, 172, 192, 194, 213, 217, 225, 226, 227, 239B, 329, 352, 356, 358, 359, 360 and 371F.
Insert articles 134A and 361A.
Remove articles 31, 257A and 329A.
Amend part 12.
Amend schedule 9.
The objective of 44th Amendment was: Amendment passed after revocation of internal emergency in the Country. 
Provides for human rights safeguards and mechanisms to prevent abuse of executive and legislative authority. Annuls some Amendments enacted in Amendment Bill 42. 
The 44th Amendment is enforced since: 20 June, 1 August & 6 September 1979 [6] 
The Prime Minster at the time of 44th Amendment was: Morarji Desai 
The President at the time of 44th Amendment was: Neelam Sanjiva Reddy 

The 45th Amendment Amend article 334.
The objective of 45th Amendment was: Extend reservation for SCs and STs and nomination of Anglo Indian members in Parliament and State Assemblies for another ten years i.e. up to 1990. 
The 45th Amendment is enforced since: 25 January 1980 
The Prime Minster at the time of 45th Amendment was: Indira Gandhi 
The President at the time of 45th Amendment was: Neelam Sanjiva Reddy 

The 46th Amendment Amend articles 269, 286 and 366.
Amend schedule 7.
The objective of 46th Amendment was: Amendment to negate judicial pronouncements on scope and applicability on Sales Tax. 
The 46th Amendment is enforced since: 2 February 1983 
The Prime Minster at the time of 46th Amendment was: Indira Gandhi 
The President at the time of 46th Amendment was: Zail Singh 

The 47th Amendment Amend schedule 9.
The objective of 47th Amendment was: Place land reform acts and amendments to these act under Schedule 9 of the constitution. 
The 47th Amendment is enforced since: 26 August 1984 
The Prime Minster at the time of 47th Amendment was: Indira Gandhi 
The President at the time of 47th Amendment was: Zail Singh 

The 48th Amendment Amend article 356.
The objective of 48th Amendment was: Article 356 amended to permit President's rule up to two years in the state of Punjab. 
The 48th Amendment is enforced since: 1 April 1985 
The Prime Minster at the time of 48th Amendment was: Indira Gandhi 
The President at the time of 48th Amendment was: Zail Singh 

The 49th Amendment Amend article 244.
Amend schedules 5 and 6.
The objective of 49th Amendment was: Recognise Tripura as a tribal state and enable the creation of a Tripura Tribal Areas Autonomous District Council. 
The 49th Amendment is enforced since: 11 September 1984 
The Prime Minster at the time of 49th Amendment was: Indira Gandhi 
The President at the time of 49th Amendment was: Zail Singh 

The 50th Amendment Amend article 33.
The objective of 50th Amendment was: Technical Amendment to curtailment of Fundamental Rights as per Part III as prescribed in Article 33 to cover Security Personnel protecting property and communication infrastructure. 
The 50th Amendment is enforced since: 11 September 1984 
The Prime Minster at the time of 50th Amendment was: Indira Gandhi 
The President at the time of 50th Amendment was: Zail Singh 

The 51st Amendment Amend articles 330 and 332.
The objective of 51st Amendment was: Provide reservation to Scheduled Tribes in Nagaland, Meghalaya, Mizoram and Arunachal Pradesh in Loksabha, similarly for Meghalaya and Arunachal in their Legislative Assemblies. 
The 51st Amendment is enforced since: 16 June 1986 
The Prime Minster at the time of 51st Amendment was: Indira Gandhi 
The President at the time of 51st Amendment was: Zail Singh 

The 52nd Amendment Amend articles 101, 102, 190 and 191.
Insert schedule 10.
The objective of 52nd Amendment was: Anti Defection Law – Provide disqualification of members from parliament and assembly in case of defection from one party to other. 
However, para 7 of the 10th Schedule was struck down by the Supreme Court in the case of Kihoto Hollohan v. Zachillhu 1992 SCR (1) 686, for being in contravention with Article 368 of the Constitution. 
The 52nd Amendment is enforced since: 1 March 1985 
The Prime Minster at the time of 52nd Amendment was: Rajiv Gandhi 
The President at the time of 52nd Amendment was: Zail Singh 

The 53rd Amendment Insert article 371G.
The objective of 53rd Amendment was: Special provision with respect to the State of Mizoram. 
The 53rd Amendment is enforced since: 20 February 1986 
The Prime Minster at the time of 53rd Amendment was: Rajiv Gandhi 
The President at the time of 53rd Amendment was: Zail Singh 

The 54th Amendment Amend articles 125 and 221.
Amend schedule 2.
The objective of 54th Amendment was: Increase the salary of Chief Justice of India & other Judges and to provide for determining future increases without the need for constitutional amendment. 
The 54th Amendment is enforced since: 1 April 1986 
The Prime Minster at the time of 54th Amendment was: Rajiv Gandhi 
The President at the time of 54th Amendment was: Zail Singh 

The 55th Amendment Insert article 371H.
The objective of 55th Amendment was: Special powers to Governor consequent to formation of state of Arunachal Pradesh. 
The 55th Amendment is enforced since: 20 February 1987 
The Prime Minster at the time of 55th Amendment was: Rajiv Gandhi 
The President at the time of 55th Amendment was: Zail Singh 

The 56th Amendment Insert article 371I.
The objective of 56th Amendment was: Transition provision to enable formation of state of Goa. 
The 56th Amendment is enforced since: 30 May 1987 
The Prime Minster at the time of 56th Amendment was: Rajiv Gandhi 
The President at the time of 56th Amendment was: Zail Singh 

The 57th Amendment Amend article 332.
The objective of 57th Amendment was: Provide reservation to Scheduled Tribes in Nagaland, Meghalaya, Mizoram and Arunachal Pradesh Legislative Assemblies. 
The 57th Amendment is enforced since: 21 September 1987 
The Prime Minster at the time of 57th Amendment was: Rajiv Gandhi 
The President at the time of 57th Amendment was: R. Venkataraman 

The 58th Amendment Insert article 394A.
Amend part 22.
The objective of 58th Amendment was: Provision to publish authentic Hindi translation of constitution as on date and provision to publish authentic Hindi translation of future amendments. 
The 58th Amendment is enforced since: 9 December 1987 
The Prime Minster at the time of 58th Amendment was: Rajiv Gandhi 
The President at the time of 58th Amendment was: R. Venkataraman 

The 59th Amendment Amend article 356.
Insert article 359A.
The objective of 59th Amendment was: Article 356 amended to permit President's rule up to three years in the state of Punjab, Articles 352 and Article 359A amended to permit imposing emergency in state of Punjab or in specific districts of the state of Punjab. 
The 59th Amendment is enforced since: 30 March 1988 
The Prime Minster at the time of 59th Amendment was: Rajiv Gandhi 
The President at the time of 59th Amendment was: R. Venkataraman 

The 60th Amendment Amend article 276.
The objective of 60th Amendment was: Profession Tax increased from a minimum of Rs. 250/- to a maximum of Rs. 2500/-. 
The 60th Amendment is enforced since: 20 December 1988 
The Prime Minster at the time of 60th Amendment was: Rajiv Gandhi 
The President at the time of 60th Amendment was: R. Venkataraman 

The 61st Amendment Amend article 326.
The objective of 61st Amendment was: Reduce age for voting rights from 21 to 18. 
The 61st Amendment is enforced since: 28 March 1989 
The Prime Minster at the time of 61st Amendment was: Rajiv Gandhi 
The President at the time of 61st Amendment was: R. Venkataraman 

The 62nd Amendment Amend article 334.
The objective of 62nd Amendment was: Extend reservation for SCs and STs and nomination of Anglo Indian members in Parliament and State Assemblies for another ten years i.e. up to 2000. 
The 62nd Amendment is enforced since: 25 January 1990 
The Prime Minster at the time of 62nd Amendment was: V. P. Singh 
The President at the time of 62nd Amendment was: R. Venkataraman 

The 63rd Amendment Amend article 356.
Remove article 359A.
The objective of 63rd Amendment was: Emergency powers applicable to State of Punjab, accorded in Article 359A as per amendment 59 repealed. 
The 63rd Amendment is enforced since: 6 January 1990 
The Prime Minster at the time of 63rd Amendment was: V. P. Singh 
The President at the time of 63rd Amendment was: R. Venkataraman 

The 64th Amendment Amend article 356.
The objective of 64th Amendment was: Article 356 amended to permit President's rule up to three years and six months in the state of Punjab. 
The 64th Amendment is enforced since: 16 April 1990 
The Prime Minster at the time of 64th Amendment was: V. P. Singh 
The President at the time of 64th Amendment was: R. Venkataraman 

The 65th Amendment Amend article 338.
The objective of 65th Amendment was: National Commission for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes formed and its statutory powers specified in The Constitution. 
The 65th Amendment is enforced since: 12 March 1992[6] 
The Prime Minster at the time of 65th Amendment was: V. P. Singh 
The President at the time of 65th Amendment was: R. Venkataraman 

The 66th Amendment Amend schedule 9.
The objective of 66th Amendment was: Place land reform acts and amendments to these act under Schedule 9 of the constitution. 
The 66th Amendment is enforced since: 7 June 1990 
The Prime Minster at the time of 66th Amendment was: V. P. Singh 
The President at the time of 66th Amendment was: R. Venkataraman 

The 67th Amendment Amend article 356.
The objective of 67th Amendment was: Article 356 amended to permit President's rule up to four years in the state of Punjab. 
The 67th Amendment is enforced since: 4 October 1990 
The Prime Minster at the time of 67th Amendment was: V. P. Singh 
The President at the time of 67th Amendment was: R. Venkataraman 

The 68th Amendment Amend article 356.
The objective of 68th Amendment was: Article 356 amended to permit President's rule up to five years in the state of Punjab. 
The 68th Amendment is enforced since: 12 March 1991 
The Prime Minster at the time of 68th Amendment was: V. P. Singh 
The President at the time of 68th Amendment was: R. Venkataraman 

The 69th Amendment Insert articles 239AA and 239AB.
The objective of 69th Amendment was: To provide for a legislative assembly and council of ministers for National Capital Territory of Delhi. Delhi continues to be a Union Territory. 
The 69th Amendment is enforced since: 1 February 1992 [6] 
The Prime Minster at the time of 69th Amendment was: P. V. Narasimha Rao 
The President at the time of 69th Amendment was: R. Venkataraman 

The 70th Amendment Amend articles 54 and 239AA.
The objective of 70th Amendment was: Include National Capital Territory of Delhi and Union Territory of Pondicherry in Electoral College for presidential election. 
The 70th Amendment is enforced since: 21 December 1991 
The Prime Minster at the time of 70th Amendment was: P. V. Narasimha Rao 
The President at the time of 70th Amendment was: R. Venkataraman 

The 71st Amendment Amend schedule 8.
The objective of 71st Amendment was: Include Konkani, Manipuri and Nepali as official languages. 
The 71st Amendment is enforced since: 31 August 1992 
The Prime Minster at the time of 71st Amendment was: P. V. Narasimha Rao 
The President at the time of 71st Amendment was: Shankar Dayal Sharma 

The 72nd Amendment Amend article 332.
The objective of 72nd Amendment was: Provide reservation to Scheduled Tribes in Tripura State Legislative Assembly. 
The 72nd Amendment is enforced since: 5 December 1992 
The Prime Minster at the time of 72nd Amendment was: P. V. Narasimha Rao 
The President at the time of 72nd Amendment was: Shankar Dayal Sharma 

The 73rd Amendment Insert part 9. Insert schedule 11.
The objective of 73rd Amendment was: Statutory provisions for Panchyat Raj as third level of administration in villages. 
The 73rd Amendment is enforced since: 24 April 1992 
The Prime Minster at the time of 73rd Amendment was: P. V. Narasimha Rao 
The President at the time of 73rd Amendment was: Shankar Dayal Sharma 

The 74th Amendment Insert part 9A , insert schedule 12 , amend article 280.
The objective of 74th Amendment was: Statutory provisions for Local Administrative bodies as third level of administration in urban areas such as towns and cities. 
The 74th Amendment is enforced since: 1 June 1992 
The Prime Minster at the time of 74th Amendment was: P. V. Narasimha Rao 
The President at the time of 74th Amendment was: Shankar Dayal Sharma 

The 75th Amendment Amend article 323B.
The objective of 75th Amendment was: Provisions for setting up Rent Control Tribunals. 
The 75th Amendment is enforced since: 15 May 1994 
The Prime Minster at the time of 75th Amendment was: P. V. Narasimha Rao 
The President at the time of 75th Amendment was: Shankar Dayal Sharma 

The 76th Amendment Amend schedule 9.
The objective of 76th Amendment was: Enable continuance of 69% reservation in Tamil Nadu by including the relevant Tamil Nadu Act under 9th Schedule of the constitution. 
The 76th Amendment is enforced since: 31 August 1994 
The Prime Minster at the time of 76th Amendment was: P. V. Narasimha Rao 
The President at the time of 76th Amendment was: Shankar Dayal Sharma 

The 77th Amendment Amend article 16.
The objective of 77th Amendment was: A technical amendment to protect reservation to SCs and STs Employees in promotions. 
The 77th Amendment is enforced since: 17 June 1995 
The Prime Minster at the time of 77th Amendment was: P. V. Narasimha Rao 
The President at the time of 77th Amendment was: Shankar Dayal Sharma 

The 78th Amendment Amend schedule 9.
The objective of 78th Amendment was: Place land reform acts and amendments to these act under Schedule 9 of the constitution. 
The 78th Amendment is enforced since: 30 August 1995 
The Prime Minster at the time of 78th Amendment was: P. V. Narasimha Rao 
The President at the time of 78th Amendment was: Shankar Dayal Sharma 

The 79th Amendment Amend article 334.
The objective of 79th Amendment was: Extend reservation for SCs and STs and nomination of Anglo Indian members in Parliament and State Assemblies for another ten years i.e. up to 2010. 
The 79th Amendment is enforced since: 25 January 2000 
The Prime Minster at the time of 79th Amendment was: Atal Bihari Vajpayee 
The President at the time of 79th Amendment was: K. R. Narayanan 

The 80th Amendment Amend articles 269 and 270.
Remove article 272.
The objective of 80th Amendment was: Implement Tenth Finance Commission recommendation to simplify the tax structures by pooling and sharing all taxes between states and the centre. 
The 80th Amendment is enforced since: 9 June 2000 
The Prime Minster at the time of 80th Amendment was: Atal Bihari Vajpayee 
The President at the time of 80th Amendment was: K. R. Narayanan 

The 81st Amendment Amend article 16.
The objective of 81st Amendment was: Protect SCs and STs reservation in filling backlog of vacancies. 
The 81st Amendment is enforced since: 9 June 2000 
The Prime Minster at the time of 81st Amendment was: Atal Bihari Vajpayee 
The President at the time of 81st Amendment was: K. R. Narayanan 

The 82nd Amendment Amend article 335.
The objective of 82nd Amendment was: Permit relaxation of qualifying marks and other criteria in reservation in promotion for SCs and STs candidates. 
The 82nd Amendment is enforced since: 8 September 2000 
The Prime Minster at the time of 82nd Amendment was: Atal Bihari Vajpayee 
The President at the time of 82nd Amendment was: K. R. Narayanan 

The 83rd Amendment Amend article 243M.
The objective of 83rd Amendment was: Exempt Arunachal Pradesh from reservation for Scheduled Castes in Panchayati Raj institutions. 
The 83rd Amendment is enforced since: 8 September 2000 
The Prime Minster at the time of 83rd Amendment was: Atal Bihari Vajpayee 
The President at the time of 83rd Amendment was: K. R. Narayanan 

The 84th Amendment Amend articles 55, 81, 82, 170, 330 and 332.
The objective of 84th Amendment was: Extend the usage of 1971 national census population figures for statewise distribution of parliamentary seats. 
The 84th Amendment is enforced since: 21 February 2002 
The Prime Minster at the time of 84th Amendment was: Atal Bihari Vajpayee 
The President at the time of 84th Amendment was: K. R. Narayanan 

The 85th Amendment Amend article 16.
The objective of 85th Amendment was: A technical amendment to protect Consequential seniority in case of promotions of SCs and STs Employees. 
The 85th Amendment is enforced since: 4 January 2002 
The Prime Minster at the time of 85th Amendment was: Atal Bihari Vajpayee 
The President at the time of 85th Amendment was: K. R. Narayanan 

The 86th Amendment Amend articles 45 and 51A.
Insert article 21A.
The objective of 86th Amendment was: Provides Right to Education until the age of fourteen. 
The 86th Amendment is enforced since: 12 December 2002 
The Prime Minster at the time of 86th Amendment was: Atal Bihari Vajpayee 
The President at the time of 86th Amendment was: A. P. J. Abdul Kalam 

The 87th Amendment Amend articles 81, 82, 170 and 330.
The objective of 87th Amendment was: Extend the usage of 2001 national census population figures for statewise distribution of parliamentary seats. 
The 87th Amendment is enforced since: 22 June 2003 
The Prime Minster at the time of 87th Amendment was: Atal Bihari Vajpayee 
The President at the time of 87th Amendment was: A. P. J. Abdul Kalam 

The 88th Amendment Amend article 270.
Insert article 268A.
Amend schedule 7.
The objective of 88th Amendment was: To extend statutory cover for levy and utilisation of Service Tax. 
The 88th Amendment is enforced since: 15 January 2004 
The Prime Minster at the time of 88th Amendment was: Atal Bihari Vajpayee 
The President at the time of 88th Amendment was: A. P. J. Abdul Kalam 

The 89th Amendment Amend article 338.
Insert article 338A.
The objective of 89th Amendment was: The National Commission for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes was bifurcated into The National Commission for Scheduled Castes and The National Commission for Scheduled Tribes. 
The 89th Amendment is enforced since: 28 September 2003 
The Prime Minster at the time of 89th Amendment was: Atal Bihari Vajpayee 
The President at the time of 89th Amendment was: A. P. J. Abdul Kalam 

The 90th Amendment Amend article 332.
The objective of 90th Amendment was: Reservation in Assam Assembly relating to Bodoland Territory Area. 
The 90th Amendment is enforced since: 28 September 2003 
The Prime Minster at the time of 90th Amendment was: Atal Bihari Vajpayee 
The President at the time of 90th Amendment was: A. P. J. Abdul Kalam 

The 91st Amendment Amend articles 75 and 164.
Insert article 361B.
Amend schedule 10.
The objective of 91st Amendment was: Restrict the size of council of ministers to 15% of legislative members & to strengthen Anti Defection laws. 
The 91st Amendment is enforced since: 1 January 2004 
The Prime Minster at the time of 91st Amendment was: Atal Bihari Vajpayee 
The President at the time of 91st Amendment was: A. P. J. Abdul Kalam 

The 92nd  Amendment Amend schedule 8.
The objective of 92nd  Amendment was: Include Bodo, Dogri, Santali and Mathili as official languages. 
The 92nd  Amendment is enforced since: 7 January 2003 
The Prime Minster at the time of 92nd  Amendment was: Atal Bihari Vajpayee 
The President at the time of 92nd  Amendment was: A. P. J. Abdul Kalam 

The 93rd  Amendment Amend article 15.
The objective of 93rd  Amendment was: To enable provision of reservation (27%) for Other Backward Class(OBCs) in government as well as private educational institutions. 
The 93rd  Amendment is enforced since: 20 January 2006 
The Prime Minster at the time of 93rd  Amendment was: Manmohan Singh 
The President at the time of 93rd  Amendment was: A. P. J. Abdul Kalam 

The 94th  Amendment Amend article 164.
The objective of 94th  Amendment was: To provide for a Minister of Tribal Welfare in newly created Jharkhand and Chhattisgarh States including Madhya Pradesh and Orissa. 
The 94th  Amendment is enforced since: 12 June 2006 
The Prime Minster at the time of 94th  Amendment was: Manmohan Singh 
The President at the time of 94th  Amendment was: A. P. J. Abdul Kalam 

The 95th  Amendment Amend article 334.
The objective of 95th  Amendment was: To extend the reservation of seats for SCs and STs and Anglo-Indian in the Lok Sabha and states assemblies from Sixty years to Seventy years. 
The 95th  Amendment is enforced since: 25 January 2010 
The Prime Minster at the time of 95th  Amendment was: Manmohan Singh 
The President at the time of 95th  Amendment was: Pratibha Patil 

The 96th  Amendment Amend schedule 8.
The objective of 96th  Amendment was: Substituted "Odia" in the place of "Oriya". 
The 96th  Amendment is enforced since: 23 September 2011 
The Prime Minster at the time of 96th  Amendment was: Manmohan Singh 
The President at the time of 96th  Amendment was: Pratibha Patil 

The 97th  Amendment Amend Art 19 and added Art 43B and Part IXB.
The objective of 97th  Amendment was: Added the words "or co-operative societies" after the word "or unions" in Article 19(l)(c) and insertion of article 43B i.e., Promotion of Co-operative Societies and added Part-IXB i.e., The Co-operative Societies. In July 2021 Supreme Court Struck Part of the amendment as it was not ratified by the states.
The amendment objective is to encourage economic activities of cooperatives which in turn help progress of rural India. It is expected to not only ensure autonomous and democratic functioning of cooperatives, but also the accountability of the management to the members and other stakeholders.
The 97th  Amendment is enforced since: 12 January 2012 
The Prime Minster at the time of 97th  Amendment was: Manmohan Singh 
The President at the time of 97th  Amendment was: Pratibha Patil 

The 98th  Amendment To insert Article 371J in the Constitution
The objective of 98th  Amendment was: To empower the Governor of Karnataka to take steps to develop the Hyderabad-Karnataka Region.[108] 
The 98th  Amendment is enforced since: 1 January 2013 
The Prime Minster at the time of 98th  Amendment was: Manmohan Singh 
The President at the time of 98th  Amendment was: Pranab Mukherjee 

The 99th  Amendment Insertion of new articles 124A, 124B and 124C. Amendments to Articles 127, 128, 217, 222, 224A, 231.
The objective of 99th  Amendment was: Formation of a National Judicial Appointments Commission. 16 State assemblies out of 29 States including Goa, Rajasthan, Tripura, Gujarat and Telangana ratified the Central Legislation, enabling the President of India to give assent to the bill. The amendment was struck down by the Supreme Court on 16 October 2015. 
The 99th  Amendment is enforced since: 13 April 2015 Repealed 16 October 2015 
The Prime Minster at the time of 99th  Amendment was: Narendra Modi 
The President at the time of 99th  Amendment was: Pranab Mukherjee 

The 100th  Amendment Amendment of First Schedule to Constitution
The objective of 100th  Amendment was: Exchange of certain enclave territories with Bangladesh and conferment of citizenship rights to residents of enclaves consequent to signing of Land Boundary Agreement (LBA) Treaty between India and Bangladesh. 
The 100th  Amendment is enforced since: 31 July 2015 
The Prime Minster at the time of 100th  Amendment was: Narendra Modi 
The President at the time of 100th  Amendment was: Pranab Mukherjee 

The 101st  Amendment Addition of articles 246A, 269A, 279A. Deletion of Article 268A. 
Amendment of articles 248, 249, 250, 268, 269, 270, 271, 286, 366, 368, Sixth Schedule, Seventh Schedule.
The objective of 101st  Amendment was: Introduced the Goods and Services Tax. 
The 101st  Amendment is enforced since: 1 July 2016 
The Prime Minster at the time of 101st  Amendment was: Narendra Modi 
The President at the time of 101st  Amendment was: Pranab Mukherjee 

The 102nd  Amendment Addition of articles 338B, 342A, and Added Clause 26C. 
Modification of articles 338, 366. 
The objective of 102nd  Amendment was: Constitutional status to National Commission for Backward Classes 
The 102nd  Amendment is enforced since: 11 August 2018 
The Prime Minster at the time of 102nd  Amendment was: Narendra Modi 
The President at the time of 102nd  Amendment was: Ram Nath Kovind 

The 103rd  Amendment Amendment to Article 15, added Clause [6], 
Amendment to Article 16, added Clause [6]. 
The objective of 103rd  Amendment was: A maximum of 10% Reservation for Economically Weaker Sections (EWSs) of citizens of classes other than the classes mentioned in clauses (4) and (5) of Article 15, i.e. Classes other than socially and educationally backward classes of citizens or the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes. Inserted Clause [6] under Article 15 as well as Inserted Clause [6] under Article 16. 
The 103rd  Amendment is enforced since: 12 January 2019 
The Prime Minster at the time of 103rd  Amendment was: Narendra Modi 
The President at the time of 103rd  Amendment was: Ram Nath Kovind 

The 104th  Amendment Amend article 334.
The objective of 104th  Amendment was: To extend the reservation of seats for SCs and STs in the Lok Sabha and states assemblies from Seventy years to Eighty years. Removed the reserved seats for the Anglo-Indian community in the Lok Sabha and state assemblies by not extending it further.
The 104th  Amendment is enforced since: 25 January 2020 
The Prime Minster at the time of 104th  Amendment was: Narendra Modi 
The President at the time of 104th  Amendment was: Ram Nath Kovind 

The 105th  Amendment Amended Article 338B, 342A and 366
The objective of 105th  Amendment was: To restore the power of the state governments to identify Other Backward Classes (OBCs) that are socially and educationally backward. This amendment annulled the Supreme Court judgement of 11 May 2021, which had empowered only the Central government for such identification.
The 105th  Amendment is enforced since: 10 August 2021 
The Prime Minster at the time of 105th  Amendment was: Narendra Modi 
The President at the time of 105th  Amendment was: Ram Nath Kovind 


Important Facts about the Constitution of India:
National Constitution Day: The Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment, Government of India, declared on November 19th 2015 that November 26th will be celebrated as National Constitution Day. It is a tribute to the father of our Constitution, Dr Bhim Rao Ambedkar.

M. N. Roy’s Suggestion was to Develop a Constitution: It was M. N. Roy who suggested the formation of a constitution, a book of code and ethics that should define the procedures, code of conduct, and ethics on all grounds in India. He proposed this idea of forming Constituent Assemblyin 1934 and was made official by the Indian National Congress in 1935.

The Father of the Indian Constitution: Dr. B. R. Ambedkar, who has written our Indian Constitution, belonged to an untouchable family and was exposed to discrimination. He used 9 languages fluently and mastered 64 subjects. It was he who introduced equal rights for all natives in India. He also introduced various acts and laws regarding women's rights in the Indian Constitution.

Writer of the Indian Constitution:
You will be surprised to know that Constitution of India has been written, not printed. It was Prem Behari Narain Raizada who patiently wrote the entire document (Constitution of India) with his own hands. It was his calligraphy in English and Hindi that can be seen on the Constitution information of the original document published in Dehradun. It took almost 3 years to finally draft the Indian Constitution in its final form.

Decoration of all the Pages:
The unique features of the Indian Constitution that can be seen on every page are designed by the artists of Shantiniketan. Among the famous names, Nandalal Bose and Behar Rammanohar Sinha were the epitomes of this team. This institute of fine arts was established by Rabindranath Tagore in Bengal.

The Constitution's pages are bound together in black leather, with beautiful gold patterns.
Three original copies of the Constitution are kept safely in special helium-filled cases in the library of the Parliament.

Dr. Ambedkar studied 60 other constitutions in the course of his work. He was assisted in the drafting by a committee.
Constitution of India is the longest in the world, and contains 1.46 lakh words. It took two years, 11 months and 18 days to draft it.

Living document: Our supreme law is referred to as a living document, as it can be changed or amended. Those who crafted it wanted it to be in accordance with our citizens’ aspirations and understood the need for modifications. Changes done to the Constitution are called constitutional amendments. The document has undergone 105 amendments, the last being in August 2021.

Handwritten Constitution:
Prem Behari Narain Raizada handwrote the original Indian Constitution in a flowing italic style with beautiful calligraphy. He used 254 NO.303 pen-holder nibs and it took six months to accomplish the writing. The Government of India assigned him a chamber at the Constitution House to carry out the significant assignment. Instead of demanding a fee, he requested permission to write his name on every page of the constitution, as well as the name of his grandpa on the last page.

A constitution with artworks:
Indian Constitution is an example of handcrafted originality. This monumental task of completing the artwork on every page of the Constitution was assigned to Acharya Nandalal Bose and his pupil in Kala Bhawan, Shanti Niketan. Nandalal Bose painted the principal images and directed his students to create other artwork. Beohar Rammanohar Sinha, a pupil of Nandalal Bose, adorned the most important page of the Constitution, "The Preamble," commonly known as the "Face of the Constitution."

Total expenditure:
The Constitution finally came into force with a total expenditure of Rupees 6.4 million.

Original copies of the constitution:
The original copies of the Constitution are kept in the Parliamentary Library. It is housed in a box filled with helium and wrapped in flannel cloth with naphthalene balls.

The time taken to prepare the constitution:
It took around 2 years, 11 months, and 18 days to create the Indian Constitution.

From Thought To Action:
The first person to call for an Indian Constituent Assembly was "M.N. Roy", an Indian Revolutionary and radical activist, in 1934. In a resolution that rejected a British proposal known as the “White Paper” on constitutional reforms for India a year later, the Indian National Congress made this an official demand. This resolution would later be enacted as the Government of India Act 1935.

More Than 2000 Amendments In First Draft:
A total of 2,475 amendments were made to the original draft. 284 members of the Constituent Assembly accepted and signed the Constitution. The Constitution  included 395 Articles, 8 Schedules, and 22 Parts at the time of the last sitting of the Constituent Assembly on January 24, 1950.

From Dominion Of India To Republic of India:
The Government of India Act was replaced by the Indian Constitution in 1935. The 1935 Government of India Act serves as the cornerstone for the Indian Constitution. The Dominion of India became the Republic of India when the Constitution took the place of the GOI Act as the primary law of the land.

Introduction Of National Emblem:
The Lion Capital Of Ashoka became the country’s national emblem on January 26, 1950. The four Asiatic lions stand for strength, courage, pride, and confidence.

Father Of The Indian Constitution:
The chief architect of the Indian Constitution was Dr. Bhimrao Ramji Ambedkar, who is regarded as the father of the Indian Constitution. He is the one who drafted the Indian Constitution after researching the laws of around 60 other nations.

Women’s Right To Vote:
Only until the Indian Constitution went into effect did Indian women acquire the complete right to vote. Full suffrage for women was introduced in India by the Constitution in 1949.

Inception Of The Preamble Of Indian Constitution:
Jawaharlal Nehru introduced the Objective Resolution, which later evolved into the Preamble of the Constitution. The words “socialist” and “secular” were added to the Preamble in 1976, during the emergency, thanks to the 42nd amendment. It outlined the fundamental tenets of the Constitution.

The First & The Last Signatory:
 The Indian Constitution was initially signed by Dr. Rajendra Prasad, the country’s first president. The final signatory was Feroze Gandhi, who was the President of the Constituent Assembly at the time.
 
Heart & Soul Of Indian Constitution:
Dr. B. R. Ambedkar referred to Article 32 of the Indian Constitution as the “heart and soul” of the document. It grants a citizen the right to file a complaint with the Supreme Court to have any fundamental rights upheld in the event that they are violated. The Right to Constitutional Remedies is another name for it.

Mini-Constitution:
The Indian National Congress, led by Indira Gandhi, passed the 42nd Amendment Act, 1976, one of the most significant revisions to the Indian Constitution. This statute is also known as “Mini-Constitution” because of the numerous amendments it made to the Indian Constitution. It incorporated sections that sought to curtail the authority of the Supreme Court and the High Courts, outlined citizens’ fundamental duties, and added the preamble terms “socialist,” “secular,” and “integrity.”

The Magna Carta Of Indian Constitution:
The Indian Constitution’s Part lll is referred to as its Magna Carta. The Magna Carta is the Declaration of Rights that King John of England signed in 1215. It is the first piece of writing to discuss a very long and comprehensive list of ‘justiciable’ fundamental rights for citizens.

What does it mean by the Constitution of India?: 
Constitution of India is essentially a set of frameworks that binds our nation together, invoking a sense of patriotism and unity that transcends social boundaries. The ideals embodied in the Indian Constitution are built entirely on a solid ethical framework designed to uplift the populace and propel Indian society ahead with a spirit of tolerance and respect for the nation’s diversity. 
Despite being a relatively young Constitution, it has undergone through some tremendous changes while demonstrating remarkable resilience to every challenge. Our Indian Constitution is a living testament that proves that the desires of heedless political avarice do not govern the populace; rather, it is the will and the words of the Constitution. 
As Dr B. R. Ambedkar aptly states, “The Constitution is not a mere lawyer’s document, it is a vehicle of life, and its spirit is always the spirit of the age!” 

Constituent Assembly of India:
The idea of a constituent assembly was first proposed in 1934 by M.N. Roy. However, the actual constituent assembly was formed in 1946 on the basis of the cabinet mission plan.

Background of the Constituent Assembly of India:
In 1934, M N Roy first proposed the idea of a constituent assembly. The demand was taken up by the Congress Party in 1935 as an official demand. The British accepted this in the August Offer of 1940. Under the Cabinet Mission plan of 1946, elections were held for the formation of the constituent assembly. The members of this assembly were elected indirectly, i.e., by the members of the provincial assemblies by the method of a single transferable vote of proportional representation. The constituent assembly was formed for the purpose of writing a constitution for independent India

Composition of Constituent Assembly:
Initially, the number of members was 389. After partition, some of the members went to Pakistan and the number came down to 299. Out of this, 229 were from the British provinces and 70 were nominated from the princely states.
Dr. Sachchidananda Sinha was the first temporary chairman of the Constituent Assembly. Later, Dr. Rajendra Prasad was elected as the President and its Vice President was Harendra Coomar Mookerjee. BN Rau was the constitutional advisor.

When did the constituent assembly first meet?
The assembly first met on 9 December 1946

Was there any role of the Muslim League in the formation of the Constitution of India ?
No, there was no role played by the Muslim League in the constituent assembly as it had boycotted this meeting citing their demand for partition

What is ‘Objective Resolution’ concerned with the constituent assembly of India?
Objective Resolution enshrined the aspirations and values of the constitution-makers. Under this, the people of India were guaranteed social, economic and political justice, equality and fundamental freedoms. This resolution was unanimously adopted on 22 January 1947 and the Preamble to the Constitution is based on it.

When was Objective Resolution moved and by who?
On 13 December 1946, Jawaharlal Nehru moved the ‘Objective Resolution’.

When was National Flag of Union adopted?
The National Flag of the Union was adopted on 22 July 1947

For how many days, the constituent assembly assembled to frame the constitution?
The time is taken by the assembly to frame the constitution: 2 years, 11 months and 17 days. Money spent in framing the constitution: Rs.64 lakhs

When was Jana Gana Mana adopted as our national anthem? 
On 24 January 1950, ‘Jana Gana Mana’ was adopted as the national anthem

How many articles our final constitution has? 
The final document had 22 parts, 395 articles and 8 schedules.

What was the total number of sessions constituent assembly had?
The assembly had met for 11 sessions

When was the draft of the Indian Constitution published?
The draft was published in January 1948 and the country’s people were asked for their feedback and inputs within 8 months

What is the date of the last session?
The last session was held during 14 – 26 November 1949. The constitution was passed and adopted by the assembly on 26 November 1949

When did the constitution of India come into force?
The constitution came into force on 26 January 1950 (which is celebrated as Republic Day)

Committees of Constituent Assembly of India:
Drafting Committee: Dr. B R Ambedkar
Union Constitution Committee: Jawaharlal Nehru
Union Powers Committee: Jawaharlal Nehru
States Committee: Jawaharlal Nehru
Steering Committee: Dr. Rajendra Prasad
Rules of Procedure Committee: Dr. Rajendra Prasad
Provincial Constitution Committee: Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel

Advisory Committee on Fundamental Rights, Minorities and Tribal and Excluded Areas: 
Fundamental Rights Sub-Committee: Acharya Kripalani
Minorities Sub-Committee: H C Mookerjee
Excluded and Partially Excluded Areas (Other than those in Assam) Sub-Committee: A V Thakkar
North-East Frontier Tribal Areas and Assam Excluded & Partially Excluded Areas Sub-Committee: Gopinath Bardoloi

When was the Constituent Assembly formed in India?
The Constituent Assembly was formed in India in 1946 for framing the Constitution of India. It was first proposed in 1934 by M.N. Roy and was devised on the basis of Cabinet Mission Plan.

What was the role of the Constituent Assembly in India?
The Constituent Assembly of India was elected to write the Constitution of India. The Constitution was framed by the Constituent Assembly and established under the Cabinet Mission Plan

History of Indian Constitution:
Background of Indian Constitution:
In 1928, the All Parties Conference convened a committee in Lucknow to prepare the Constitution of India, which was known as the Nehru Report.
Most of India was under direct British rule from 1857 to 1947. Upon independence it became clear an new constitution was need to be created. But for that the all of India needed to be bough into the union. This meant the the Princely States needed to be convinced to become a part of the Indian union. Either by force or diplomacy. Sardar Vallabhai Patel and V.P Menon did this unenviable task. Until this happened India was still legally a dominion under the British, responsible for external security
Thus, the constitution of India repealed the Indian Independence Act 1947 and Government of India Act 1935 when it became effective on 26 January 1950. India ceased to be a dominion of the British Crown and became a sovereign democratic republic with the constitution.

Historical Evolution of the Indian Constitution:
There are various layers in the background of the Indian Constitution:
Regulating Act 1773, Pitt’s India Act 1784, Charter Act of 1813, Charter Act of 1833, Charter Act of 1853, Government of India Act 1858, Indian Councils Act 1861, India Councils Act 1892, Morley-Minto Reforms 1909, Montague-Chelmsford Reforms 1919, Government of India Act 1935 and Indian Independence Act 1947.
These acts were in some way instrumental for the development of the Indian Constitution.

Regulating Act 1773:
First time the British Parliament resorted to regulating the affairs of the East India Company. The Governor of Bengal was made the Governor-General of Bengal (Warren Hastings).
An Executive Council of the Governor-General was created with 4 members. Centralised the administration with the Presidencies of Madras and Bombay being made subordinate to the Bengal Presidency. Supreme Court was established at Calcutta as the Apex Court in 1774. Prohibited company officials from engaging in private trade and from accepting gifts from Indians.

Pitt’s India Act 1784:
Commercial and political functions of the company separated. The Court of Directors managed the commercial activities while the Board of Control managed political affairs. The company territories in India were called ‘British possession in India’. Governor’s Councils were set up in Madras and Bombay as well.

Charter Act 1813:
This act ended the East India Company’s monopoly over trade with India except in tea and opium. Trade with India was open to all British subjects.

Charter Act 1833:
Governor-General of Bengal was designated the Governor-General of India (Lord William Bentinck). The legislative powers of the Bombay and Madras Presidencies were removed.
This act ended the commercial activities of the company and it was transformed into an administrative body.

Charter Act 1853:
The legislative and executive powers of the Governor-General’s Council were separated. A Central Legislative Council was created of 6 members out of which 4 were appointed by the provisional governments of Madras, Bombay, Agra and Bengal. The Indian civil service was opened as a means to recruit officers for administration through open competition.

Government of India Act 1858:
After the 1857 revolt, the rule of the company was ended and the British possessions in India came directly under the British Crown. The office of the Secretary of State for India was created. He was assisted by a 15-member Council of India. The Indian administration was under his authority and the Viceroy was his agent. The Governor-General was designated the Viceroy as well (Lord Canning). The Court of Directors and the Board of Control were abolished.

Indian Councils Act 1861:
Indians were given representation in the Viceroy’s Councils. 3 Indians entered the Legislative Council. Provisions were made for the entry of Indians in the Viceroy’s Executive council also as non-official members. Portfolio system was recognised. Decentralisation initiated with the presidencies of Madras and Bombay being restored their legislative powers.

Indian Councils Act 1892:
Indirect elections (nominations) were introduced. Legislative Councils expanded. Gave more functions to the legislative councils such as the discussion of budget and questioning the executive.

Indian Councils Act 1909 (Morley-Minto Reforms):
Direct elections to the legislative councils were introduced for the first time. Central Legislative Council became the Imperial Legislative Council. The number of members of the legislative council was increased from 16 to 60. The concept of the separate communal electorate was accepted. For the first time, an Indian was made a member of the Viceroy’s Executive Council. (Satyendra Prasad Sinha – Law Member).

Government of India Act 1919 (Montague-Chelmsford Reforms):
Central and provincial subjects were separated. Diarchy was introduced in the provincial governments with executive councillors being in charge of the reserved list and the ministers in charge of the transferred list of subjects. The ministers were nominated from among the elected members of the legislative council and were responsible to the legislature. A bicameral legislature was introduced for the first time at the centre. (Legislative council and legislative assembly later to become Rajya Sabha and Lok Sabha respectively). It mandated 3 members of the Viceroy’s executive council to be Indians. This act provided for the first time, the establishment of a public service commission in India. This act extended the right to vote and with this, about 10% of the population acquired voting rights.

Government of India Act 1935:
An all-India Federation was proposed which would consist of British India and the princely states. This never materialised though. Subjects were divided between the centre and the provinces. Centre was in charge of the Federal List, provinces in charge of the Provincial List and there was a Concurrent List which both catered to. Diarchy was abolished at the provincial level and introduced at the centre. More autonomy was accorded to the provinces and in 6 out of 11 provinces, the bicameral legislature was introduced. A federal court was established and the Indian Council abolished. Burma and Aden were severed off from India. This act provided for the establishment of the RBI. This Act continued until it was replaced by the new Indian Constitution.

Indian Independence Act 1947:
India was declared independent and sovereign. The Viceroy and the Governors were made constitutional (nominal) heads. Set up responsible governments at the centre and the provinces. Assigned both legislative and executive powers to the Constituent Assembly of India.

Who is Father of Indian constitution?
The father of the Indian Constitution is widely regarded as Dr. B.R. Ambedkar. On 29 August, he was appointed Chairman of the Constitution Drafting Committee, and was appointed by the Assembly to write India’s new Constitution.

What is 104th amendment of Indian Constitution?
The Constitution of India’s One Hundred and Fourth Amendment (104th Constitutional Amendment Act) extended by ten years the deadline for the cessation of reservation of seats in the Lok Sabha and state legislative assemblies for members of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes.

Preamble of the Indian Constitution:
The ‘Preamble’ of the Constitution of India is a brief introductory statement that sets out the guiding purpose and principles of the document, and it indicates the source from which the document which derives its authority, meaning, the people. It was adopted on 26 November 1949 by the Constituent Assembly of India and came into effect on 26th January 1950.

Preamble of India – Objective Resolution:
In 1946, Objective Resolution was moved by Jawaharlal Nehru, describing the constitutional structure. In 1947 (22nd January) it was adopted. It shaped the Constitution of India and its modified version is reflected in the Preamble of the Indian Constitution. The basic tenets that the objective resolution highlighted were:
1. Constituent Assembly’s resolve to see India as independent, sovereign and republic
2. To draw a Constitution for India
3. To make all territories of the pre-independent India into united states of post-independent India
4. To realize residual powers, autonomy on such states as the Constitution of India reflects
5. To realize union with the power which will be different than those given to such states
6. The people of India to play the source of power and authority of the sovereignty, and the independence
7. To provide justice, social, economic and political equality of status of opportunity and, freedom of thought, expression, belief, faith, worship, vocation, association and action, subject to law and public morality before the law
8. To provide adequate safeguards to the minorities, tribal and backward areas and other depressed and backward classes
9. To maintain the integrity of the Indian republic’s territory and its territorial rights on land, sea, air according to the justice and law of the civilized nation
10. To promote peace and welfare among the worldly nations.

Is preamble a part of Indian Constitution?
Yes, it is a part of the Indian constitution, also emphasized in Kesavananda Bharti Case.
 
Who wrote the preamble of India?
The preamble of India contains tenets highlighted in the Objective Resolution drafted by Jawaharlal Nehru in 1946

How many preambles does the Indian Constitution have?
Only 1 preamble along with 22 parts and 12 schedules and 448 articles, Indian Constitution today exists

What is the most important word in the Preamble of India?
Though no particular word has been given more importance than others, however, ‘We, the people of India’ are the words which are termed as the most powerful in the Preamble to the Indian Constitution

Why do we need a Preamble? 
It gives us fundamental values and highlights of the Constitution

In which case, did the Supreme Court declare passed a judgement that Preamble is not a part of Indian Constitution?
In Berubari Case (1960), SC declared Preamble not to be a part of Indian Constitution

Interesting Facts about Preamble of Indian Constitution:
Preamble was enacted after the enactment of the entire Constitution of India
The term ‘secular’ was added to the Preamble of the Indian Constitution by the 42nd Constitutional Amendment Act of 1976.
The Preamble secures to all citizens of India liberty of belief, faith and worship
Ideal of justice (social, economic and political) in the Preamble are borrowed from the Soviet Union (Russia) Constitution
Republic and the ideals of liberty, equality and fraternity are borrowed from the French Constitution
Preamble, in itself, has been first introduced through the American Constitution

Four Main Ingredients of the Indian Preamble:
The source of the Indian Constitution, nature of the Indian State, the objectives of the Constitution of India & the date of adoption of the Indian State, are four main ingredients of the Indian Preamble

Source of the Indian Constitution: The People of India are revealed to be the source of the authority of the Indian Constitution. The words, ‘We, the People of India’ reflect the same.
 
Nature of the Indian State: The Preamble of India tags India as the sovereign, secular, republic, secular and democratic nation

Objective of the Indian Constitution: Justice, Liberty, Equality and Fraternity are denoted as the objectives of the Preamble of India

Adoption Date of the Constitution of India : November 26, 1949  as the date when then the Indian Constitution

Some important keywords in the Preamble of India like: Sovereign, Socialist,Secular, Democratic, Republic, Justice, Liberty, Equality, Fraternity

How many words are in the Preamble of the Indian Constitution?
The Preamble of Indian Constitution has 73 words. The 73-word Preamble to the Constitution of India outlines the ideals that must guide Indian democracy. Together with the Directive Principles of State Policy, it provides the context in which the country can achieve the fundamental rights guaranteed by the Constitution.

What is Preamble Explain?
A preamble is an introductory statement in a document that explains the document’s philosophy and objectives. In a Constitution, it presents the intention of its framers, the history behind its creation, and the core values and principles of the nation. The ideals behind the Preamble to India’s Constitution were laid down by Jawaharlal Nehru’s Objectives Resolution, adopted by the Constituent Assembly on January 22, 1947. Although not enforceable in court, the Preamble states the objects of the Constitution, and acts as an aid during the interpretation of Articles when language is found ambiguous.

What are the beginning words in the Preamble to the Constitution of India?
The preamble begins with the words “We the people of India…” thus clearly indicating the source of all authority of the constitution.It emphasizes the sovereignty of the people and the fact that all powers of government flow from the people. It is the people of India on whose authority the Constitution rests. The preamble surmises that it is the people of India who are the authors of the constitution.Thus the words “We, the people of India” declares in unambiguous terms that the Constitution has been adopted, enacted and given to themselves by the people of India.

Is the Preamble basic structure of the Constitution?
Preamble is part of the Constitution. Preamble indicates the basic structure of the Constitution. Preamble is neither enforceable nor justifiable in a court of law. This implies that courts cannot pass orders against the government in India to implement the ideas in the Preamble. Preamble can be amended and it has been amended only once through the 42nd Constitutional Amendment Act 1976.

Schedules of Indian Constitution - 12 Schedules of India:
There are 12 Schedules in the Constitution of India. One of the first mentions of Schedules was made in the Government of India Act, 1935 where it included 10 Schedules. Later, when the Indian Constitution was adopted in 1949, it consisted of 8 Schedules. Today, with the amendments in the Indian Constitution, there are a total of 12 Schedules.

First Schedule of Indian Constitution: It contains the name of States and Union Territories, Territorial Jurisdiction of states is also included

Second Schedule of Indian Constitution: The provisions in relation to allowances, privileges, emoluments of:
President of India, Governors of Indian States, Speaker of Lok Sabha & Deputy Speaker of Lok Sabha, Chairman of Rajya Sabha & Deputy Chairman of Rajya Sabha, Speaker and Deputy Speaker of Legislative Assemblies of Indian States, Chairman and Deputy Chairman of Legislative Councils of the Indian States, Supreme Court Judges, High Court Judges, Comptroller & Auditor General of India (CAG)

Third Schedule: It contains the forms of oath and affirmation for:
Union Ministers of India, Parliament Election Candidates, Members of Parliament (MPs), Supreme Court Judges, Comptroller and Auditor General, State Ministers, State Legislature Elections’ Candidates, State Legislature Members, High Court Judges

Fourth Schedule: It contains the provisions in relation to the allocation of seats for States and Union Territories in the Rajya Sabha

Fifth Schedule: It contains provisions in relation to the administration and control of scheduled areas and scheduled tribes

Sixth Schedule: It contains provisions in relation to the administration of tribal areas in the states of Assam, Meghalaya, Tripura and Mizoram

Seventh Schedule: Seventh schedule deals with the three legislative lists: Union, State, Concurrent

Eighth Schedule 	It deals with the 22 official languages recognized by the Constitution of India:
Assamese, Bengali, Bodo, Dogri (Dongri), Gujarati, Hindi, Kannada, Kashmiri, Konkani, Mathili (Maithili), Malayalam, Manipuri, Marathi, Nepali, Oriya, Punjabi , Sanskrit, Santhali, Sindhi, Tamil, Telugu, Urdu

Ninth Schedule: It deals with the state acts and regulations of that deal with land reforms and abolition of the zamindari system. It also deals with the acts and regulations of the Parliament dealing with other matters.
Note: 1st Amendment Act 1951 added the Ninth Schedule to protect the laws included in it from judicial scrutiny on the ground of violation of fundamental rights. However, in 2007, the Supreme Court ruled that the laws included in Ninth schedule after April 24, 1973, are now open to judicial review

Tenth Schedule: It contains provisions relating to disqualification of the members of Parliament and State Legislatures on the ground of defection.
Note: Tenth schedule was added by the 52nd Amendment Act of 1985, also known as Anti-defection Law 

Eleventh Schedule: It contains the provisions that specify the powers, authority and responsibilities of Panchayats. It has 29 matters.
Note: Eleventh schedule was added by the 73rd Amendment Act of 1992 

Twelfth Schedule: It deals with the provisions that specify the powers, authority and responsibilities of Municipalities. It has 18 matters. 
Note: Twelfth schedule was added by the 74th Amendment Act of 1992

How many Schedules are there in India?
There are 12 Schedules in the Indian Constitution.

What is the 11th and 12th Schedule of India?
Eleventh Schedule – It contains the provisions that specify the powers, authority and responsibilities of Panchayats.
Fundamental Rights – It deals with the provisions that specify the powers, authority and responsibilities of Municipalities.

Which act gave Constitutional recognition to the municipalities?
74th Amendment Act 1992 gave constitutional recognition to urban local bodies i.e. municipalities.

Representation of People Act, 1951:
The Representation of People Act, 1951 was passed by the Parliament in accordance with Article 327 of the Constitution of India. This legislation deals with the conduct of elections in the country and is hence a very important one. Articles 324 to 329 of Part XV of the Indian Constitution provides for the country’s electoral system. The Constitution confers upon the Parliament the power to enact laws for all matters connected with elections to the Parliament and the State Legislature.  	

When was the Representation of the People Act passed?
The first Representation of People Act  was enacted in 1950.

What amendment did the Representation of People Act make?
The Representation of People Act  was amended many times. In 1966, the amendment to the 1951 Act abolished election tribunals. Many other amendments were passed, the details of which are mentioned in the article.

Can a convicted person contest election in India?
A person convicted of any offence and imprisoned for more than 2 years shall be disqualified from contesting for a period of 6 years after he or she is released from jail. After the 6-year period, he/she can contest elections.

Right to Education Act (RTE):
The Right to Education Act (RTE) is important legislation that marks a watershed in the education system in India. With its enactment, the right to education has become a fundamental right in the country.
The Act is completely titled “the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act”. It was passed by the Parliament in August 2009. When the Act came into force in 2010, India became one among 135 countries where education is a fundamental right of every child.

What are the basic features of Right to Education Act?
Some of the basic features of the RTE are:
1. Free and compulsory education for all children in the age group 6 to 14.
2. There will not be any detention or examination until elementary education is completed. However, there has been an amendment to this (as mentioned above in the criticisms of the Act).
3. This makes providing education a legal obligation of the governments.
4. It also makes it mandatory for all private schools to reserve 25% of their seats for the EWS and disadvantaged groups.

What is the age limit for RTE?
All children between the ages of 6 and 14 have the right to free education under the provisions of the Act.

What is Article 21 of the Constitution?
Article 21 deals with the right to life and personal liberty. It is a fundamental right. To know more click on Right to Life (Article 21) – Indian Polity Notes.

What is the importance of the right to education?
Education is a significant step to achieving all other basic human rights. Education can help decrease poverty, reduce social inequalities, empower women and others marginalised, bring down discrimination and finally help individuals live life to their fullest potentials. It helps improve access to opportunities for a better life in terms of employment and business. It can also bring about peace and overall prosperity to a region. Therefore, education is one of the most important rights.

Right to Information:
The right to information is a fundamental right under Article 19 (1) of the Indian Constitution. In 1976, in the Raj Narain vs the State of Uttar Pradesh case, the Supreme Court ruled that Right to information will be treated as a fundamental right under article 19. The Supreme Court held that in Indian democracy, people are the masters and they have the right to know about the working of the government.
Thus the government enacted the Right to Information act in 2005 which provides machinery for exercising this fundamental right.

What do you mean by the right to information?
Right to information is a right given to the citizens to question and hold the government accountable for its functions. The RTI act 2005 helps in exercising this right.

How can I use the Right to Information Act?
RTI can be filed by any citizen through an application submitting to the designated officer by paying Rupees ten.

Which type of right is right to information?
Right to Information has been categorised as a Fundamental Right under Article 19(1) of the Indian constitution by the Supreme Court.

What is the main objective of RTI?
RTI was introduced to empower citizens to question the government and its working. Any citizen could request for information that does not threaten the internal security and integrity of India.

Roshni Act :
The Roshni Act is formally known as the J&K State Lands (Vesting of Ownership to the Occupants) Act, 2001.

Official Secrets Act 1923:
The Official Secrets Act of 1923 is India’s anti-espionage. It states that actions which involve helping an enemy state against India are strongly condemned. It also states that one cannot approach, inspect, or even pass over a prohibited government site or area. As per the act, helping an enemy state can be in the form of communicating a sketch, plan, a model of an official secret, or of official codes or passwords, to the enemy.

Does the official secrets act expire?
No, the OSA 2013 is the official act that hasn’t undergone any changes. As per a report, there is a suggestion in the 2nd ARC report to substitute the OSA by a chapter in the National Security Act as the official secrets act has often been in the news post the implementation of Right to Information Act.

Who introduced the Official Secrets Act in India?
The Indian Official Secrets Act 1904 was introduced by Lord Curzon. Later, it was replaced by the OSA 1923.

Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897:
This colonial Act was enacted by the British, for the first time in the then state of Bombay during the Bubonic Plague.
It is a state government Act. The Act strives to protect the common citizens in a particular area during the outbreak of an epidemic of a dangerous disease.

What is 44th Amendment in Indian Constitution?
44th Amendment is an act that was introduced into the constitution by 45th Amendment Bill in the year 1978. In 1976, with the introduction of the 42nd Amendment Act, there were various provisions that were amended against the will of the citizens hence, to reverse those changes and safeguard the interests of the nation, 44th Amendment Act was called into action.

Which right has been abolished by 44th Amendment?
The 44th Amendment of 1978 removed the right to property from the list of fundamental rights. A new provision, Article 300-A, was added to the constitution, which provided that “no person shall be deprived of his property save by authority of law”.

What was the aim of the 44th Amendment Act?
The Amendment aimed to undo several changes that had been made to the Constitution by the 42nd Amendment which had been enacted by the Indira Gandhi-led Indian National Congress during the Emergency.

What is the 42nd Amendment Act?
The Constitution of India is unique for its content and spirit. The Constitution of India decides the rule of the land and is taken as the supreme law of the land. The constituent assembly that was behind formulating our Constitution has also given scope for amendments in it with time. Hence, the Indian Constitution of what it is today has undergone substantive changes on account of several amendments. The act also called The Constitution Act, 1976 is termed as one of the most controversial acts in the history of amendments to the Indian Constitution. It amended/ introduced various provisions given below:
1. Attempted to reduce the power of the Supreme Court and the High Courts
2. Laid down Fundamental Duties for citizens
3. Terms- Socialist, Secular and Integrity added to the Preamble

Why is the 42nd Amendment called ‘Mini Constitution’?
The 42nd amendment attempted to alter the basic structure of the Indian Constitution. Check the table below to read what all amendments were brought by the Constitution Act, 1976 because of which it was called the mini-constitution.

What are the three terms added in preamble through 42nd Constitutional Amendment Act?
The 42nd Constitutional Amendment Act of 1976 added: “Socialist”, “Integrity” and “Secular” to the Preamble.

When was the 42nd amendment of Indian Constitution enacted and who was behind it?
The 42nd Amendment Act of the Indian Constitution was enacted in 1976 by the Indian National Congress, led by Indira Gandhi.

Why is 42nd amendment act called the mini Constitution?
The 42nd amendment act is also known as the “Mini-Constitution” because of the enormous number of amendments it has made to the Indian Constitution. It attempted to alter the basic structure of the Indian Constitution.

What are the aims of 42nd constitutional amendment?
Two aims of 42nd amendment act are – to reduce the power of the Supreme Court and the High Courts for the validity of constitutional laws. To lay down the fundamental duties for the citizens of the nation.

In which case was the 42nd amendment Act declared as null and void by the Supreme Court?
In Minerva Mills Case (1980) the supreme court declared two changes made in the constitution by the 42 Amendment Act 1976 to be null and void. These changes were made in article 368 of the Indian constitution. This judgement strengthened the ‘Doctrine of Basic Structure’.

Which subject was transferred from the state list to the concurrent list by the 42nd amendment to the Constitution?
The 42nd Amendment Act was enacted in 1976, reorganizing the Seventh Amendment to ensure that the subjects of the State list such as education, forestry, wildlife and bird protection, the administration of justice, and weights and measures were transferred to the Concurrent List.

Disaster Management Act, 2005:
The Disaster Management Act of 2005 (DMA 2005) is an act passed by the government of India for the ‘efficient management of disasters and other matters connected to it.
What is the Disaster Management Act, 2005?
The Disaster Management Act of 2005 (DMA 2005) is an act passed by the government of India for the ‘efficient management of disasters and other matters connected to it.

When was the Disaster Management Act, 2005 made effective from?
The Disaster Management Act, 2005 was made effective from December 23, 2005, to provide for the effective management of disasters and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.

What is the significance of the Disaster Management Act, 2005?
The significance of the Disaster Management Act, 2005:
1. For planning and implementation of disaster plans
2. To prevent or mitigate people from disaster-affected areas
3. To respond and recover from disaster events
4. Coordination and management of disaster-affected areas

What is the role of the National Disaster Management Authority (NDMA)?
The role of the National Disaster Management Authority (NDMA) is:
1 Laying down policies for disaster management
2. Approving the plans prepared by the different concerned Departments
3. Draw a National and State Plan

Why was the Disaster Management Act, 2005 criticised?
Given below are the reasons as to why the Disaster Management Act, 2005 was criticised:
1. Absence of the declaration of ‘disaster-prone zones’
2. As per DMA, disasters cannot be predicted

Road Safety And Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Act 2019:
 The Motor Vehicles Act was recently amended and several new provisions and increased penalties have been added.

Drug Price Control Order 2013 :
The Department of Pharmaceuticals, Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers had announced the Drugs Price Control Act, 2013 to improvise the availability of basic medicines at affordable prices across the country. The order has been issued by the Government of India for the regulation of drug pricing in the country under Section 3 of Essential Commodities Act, 1955. National Pharmaceutical Pricing Authority (NPPA) will be responsible for the implementation of DPCO 2013. It was introduced in May 2013 and had affected the pricing of over 300 essential medicines based on their manufacturing cost. As per the DPCO 2013, all dosages mentioned in the National List of Essential Medicines (NLEM) will be under price control. 

What is the Drug Price Control Order?
The Department of Pharmaceuticals, Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers, under the guidance of Government of India announced the revised Drug Price Control Oder in 2013 to regulate drug pricing across India for easy availability of essential medicines to the people of the country.

What is the role of NPPA in DPCO?
National Pharmaceutical Pricing Authority or NPPA is attached to the office of the Department of Pharmaceuticals (DoP), Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers and is an independent body for regulation of drug pricing in India. All reforms under DPCO are bound to be implemented by NPPA.

What is the significance of Drug Price Control Oder 2013?
The DPCO 2013 had been announced to ensure that the essential drugs are available in the market at affordable prices for the general public. This would also ensure the availability of such medicines in bulk so that one may not have to switch to expensive drugs for emergency treatment.

Who regulated drug pricing in India?
In India, the National Pharmaceutical Pricing Authority (NPPA) is the independent organisation established by the Government to manage and regulate the pricing of drugs in the country.

National Medical Commission (NMC) Bill, 2019:
What is the National Medical Commission (NMC) bill?
The National Medical Commission (NMC) Bill proposes a common final year MBBS exam, to be known as National Exit Test (NEXT), for admission to postgraduate medical courses and for obtaining a license to practice medicine. It would also act as a screening test for foreign medical graduates. The Bill provides for setting up of a National Medical Commission (NMC) in place of the MCI for development and regulation of all aspects of medical education, profession and institutions. It also provides for setting up a Medical Advisory Council to advise and make recommendations to the panel.

What is the problem with the NMC bill?
The Indian Medical Association (IMA) has raised concerns over Section 32 of the NMC Bill that provides for licensing of 3.5 lakhs non-medical persons or Community Health Providers to practise modern medicine.“The term Community Health Provider has been vaguely defined to allow anyone connected with modern medicine to get registered in NMC and is licensed to practise modern medicine,” said Indian Medical Association (IMA) in an official statement.

What was the purpose of NMC Bill 2019?
The NMC Bill seeks to replace the 63-year-old corruption-plagued Medical Council of India (MCI) with setting up of a National Medical Commission and repeal the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956, which led to the formation of the MCI. Union Health and Family Welfare Minister Harsh Vardhan said the legislation would go down in history as one of the best reforms ending ‘inspector raj’ in medical education. The Bill aims to usher in major changes in the medical education sector. The NMC Bill was first introduced in Parliament in December 2017. Vardhan noted that NMC Bill 2019 is an improved version of the one brought as an ordinance in 2017.

Mines and Minerals Development and Regulation Amendment Act, 2021:
What were the result of the 2016 Amendment on the Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act?
The Union Cabinet of India approved amendments in March 2016. The amendment allowed transfer of captive mining leases not granted through auction. Transfer of captive mining leases, granted otherwise than through auction, would allow mergers and acquisitions of companies and facilitate ease of doing business for companies to improve profitability and decrease costs of the companies’ dependent on supply of mineral ore from captive leases.

What is the scope of the Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act?
This act is applicable to all mineral except minor minerals and atomic minerals. It details the process and conditions for acquiring a mining or prospecting licence in India.

Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act (MGNREGA):
What is the aim of MGNREGA?
MGNREGA aims to enhance livelihood security in rural areas by providing at least 100 days of wage employment in a financial year to every household whose adult members volunteer to do unskilled manual work.

What is the objective of MGNREGA?
The MGNREGA was initiated with the objective of “enhancing livelihood security in rural areas by providing at least 100 days of guaranteed wage employment in a financial year, to every household whose adult members volunteer to do unskilled manual work”.

When the MGNREGA Scheme officially launched?
2nd February 2006
The Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act was passed on 23rd August 2005

What was MGNREGA earlier called?
It was known to be National Rural Employment Guarantee Act

What is MGNREGA Job Card?
It is a document that renders a worker entitled for work under the MGNREGA Scheme

Mandate of Mahatma Gandhi NREGS: Provision of at least 100 days of work that provides guaranteed wage in a financial year

MGNREGA Official Website: https://nrega.nic.in/netnrega/home.aspx

Personal Data Protection Bill, 2019:
When was the Personal Data Protection Bill passed?
The Personal Data Protection Bill, 2019 (“PDPB”) was approved by the cabinet ministry of India on December 4, 2019, and was introduced in Lok Sabha by the Minister of Electronics and Information Technology, on December 11, 2019.

What is the Personal Data Protection Bill 2019?
In August 2017, the Supreme Court held that privacy is a fundamental right, flowing from the right to life and personal liberty under Article 21 of the Constitution. Thus, this Bill prescribes the manner in which personal data is to be collected, processed, used, disclosed, stored and transferred.

How has ‘data’ been classified as per the Personal Data Protection Act, 2019?
Data can be classified into three:
1. Personal data – Name, address, the identity details of a person
2. Sensitive personal data (SPD) – Finances, Health, Caste, Religion, Belief, sexual orientation, etc.
3. Critical personal data – National or Military security information

Information Technology Act, 2000:
The Information Technology Act, 2000 was enacted by the Indian Parliament in 2000. It is the primary law in India for matters related to cybercrime and e-commerce.
What is the main provision of IT Act 2000?
The original act addressed electronic documents, e-signatures, and authentication of those records. It also enacted penalties for security breach offenses including damaging computer systems or committing cyber terrorism.

What are the features of IT Act 2000?
Features of the Information Technology Act, 2000
All electronic contracts created through secure electronic channels were legally valid.
Legal recognition for digital signatures.
Security measures for electronic records and conjointly digital signatures are in place.

How many sections are in the IT Act 2000?
The original Act contained 94 sections, divided into 13 chapters and 4 schedules.

Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985 (NDPS Act):
The NDPS Act prohibits a person from the production/manufacturing/cultivation, possession, sale, purchasing, transport, storage, and/or consumption of any narcotic drug or psychotropic substance.

What are the salient features of Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances (NDPS) Act?
The Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985 also knows as the NDPS Act, prohibits any individual from engaging in any activity consisting of production, cultivation, sale, purchase, transport, storage, and/or consumption of any narcotic drug or psychotropic substance.

What is difference between narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances?
From a medical point of view, psychotropics designate chemical substances that act upon the mind, that is on the conscious or unconscious mental life of an individual. Narcotics include substances that cause stupor, muscular relaxation and a reduction or elimination of sensitivity.

Panchayati Raj - 73rd Constitutional Amendment Act:
What is the importance of Panchayati Raj?
Panchayati Raj institutes village local government that plays a significant role in the development of villages especially in areas like primary education, health, agricultural developments, women and child development and women participation in local government, etc.

Which state in India has no Panchayati Raj institution?
All states of India have Panchayati Raj systems except Nagaland, Meghalaya and Mizoram, in all Union Territories except Delhi; and certain other areas.

What are the features of Panchayati Raj?
1. Gram Sabha: Gram Sabha is the primary body of the Panchayati Raj system. It is a village assembly consisting of all the registered voters within the area of the panchayat.
2. Three Tier System: village, intermediate and district levels.
3. Election of members and chairperson: The members to all the levels of the Panchayati Raj are elected directly and the chairpersons to the intermediate and the district levels are elected indirectly.

What are the 3 stages of Panchayati Raj?
The 3 stages or levels of the Panchayati Raj system in India are -Village Panchayat, Block Panchayat and District Panchayat.

Government of NCT of Delhi (Amendment) Act, 2021:
The Act basically gives more power to the Lieutenant Governor (LG) of the National Capital Territory of Delhi and diminished the elected government’s power. The Act also seeks to bring in some clarity on certain subjects in the Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi Act, 1991.

What was the Government of NCT of Delhi (Amendment) Act?
The Act basically gives more power to the Lieutenant Governor (LG) of the National Capital Territory of Delhi and diminished the elected government’s power. The Act also seeks to bring in some clarity on certain subjects in the Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi Act, 1991.

When was the Government of NCT of Delhi (Amendment) Act, 2021 passed?
The Government of NCT of Delhi (Amendment) Act, 2021 received the presidential assent in March 2021.

Places of Worship (Special Provisions) Act, 1991:
In March 2021, the Supreme Court asked the Central Government to respond to a plea that challenged the Places of Worship (Special Provisions) Act, 1991.
The Places of Worship (Special Provisions) Act of 1991 is often seen in the news in relation to the Ram Mandir issue and also the Krishna Temple at Mathura and the Kashi Vishwanath – Gyanvapi Mosque issue. In the most recent of events, the Supreme Court asked the Centre to respond to a plea challenging the Places of Worship (Special Provisions) Act, 1991 which freezes the status of places of worship as it was on August 15, 1947.

What was the objective of 102nd Amendment Act?
The 102nd Amendment sought to grant the National Commission on Backward Classes (NCBC) constitutional status, at par with the National Commission for Scheduled Castes (NCSC) and the National Commission for Scheduled Tribes.

102nd Amendment Act:
The Supreme Court, in May 2021, held that the 102nd Amendment Act of 2018 removed the power of the states to identify socially and educationally backward classes under their territory for grant of quota in jobs and admissions. 

What is the National Commission for Backward Classes?
The NCBC is a body set up under the National Commission for Backward Classes Act, 1993. It has the power to examine complaints regarding inclusion or exclusion of groups within the list of backward classes, and advise the central government in this regard. The Bill seeks to establish the NCBC under the Constitution, and provide it the authority to examine complaints and welfare measures regarding socially and educationally backward classes.

Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988:
The Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 (PCA, 1988) is an Act of the Parliament of India enacted to combat corruption in government agencies and public sector businesses in India.
The Prevention of Corruption Act was enacted in order to fight corruption and other malpractices in government and public sector business in India.Under PCA, 1988 the Central Government has the power to appoint judges to investigate and try those cases where the following offences have been committed

Tribunals Reforms Act, 2021:
The Tribunals Reforms (Rationalisation and Conditions of Service) Ordinance, 2021 was promulgated in April 2021. The Tribunals Reforms Act, 2021 essentially replaces the ordinance.
1. The Act absolves certain appellate tribunals/boards and shifts their functions to other existing judicial bodies such as high courts.
2. It seeks to abolish certain appellate tribunals (for example, the Film Certification Appellate Tribunal, Airports Appellate Tribunal, etc.) and also bring in changes in the terms of service of the tribunal officials.
3. The Supreme Court questioned the government over the hasty passage of the bill and also asked the government to give reasons for the bill’s introduction.

Qualification for the post of President of India:
According to Article 58 of the Constitution, The Qualifications Necessary For Election As President Of India are:
He/she should be a citizen of India
He/she should be completed the age of thirty-five years or above
He/she should be qualified to become a member of the Lok Sabha
He/she should not hold any office of profit under the Union or any State government, or any local or other authority.

What is the minimum age requirement for India's president?
The President of India must be 35 years old or older.

Does the President of India have to reside in India?
There is no specific residency requirement for the Indian President.

What are the requirements for the President of India to be eligible for public office?
The President of India may not take a lucrative job in the central or state governments of India.

How is the Indian President elected?
The President of India is chosen by an Electoral College comprised of elected members of both houses of Parliament and elected members of the Legislative Assemblies of the States and UTs.

Can the President of India be removed from office?
In the event of a violation of the Constitution, the President of India can be impeached and removed from office. However, initiating the impeachment process is extremely difficult and requires an absolute majority in both houses of the parliament.

How long does the President of India end up serving?
The President of India maintains office for a five-year term and is eligible for re-election. 

President of India - Article 52-62:
The Indian President is the head of the state and he is also called the first citizen of India. He is a part of Union Executive, provisions of which are dealt with Article 52-78 including articles related to President (Article 52-62)

The Indian President is the head of the state. He is the first citizen of India and is a symbol of solidarity, unity, and integrity of the nation. He is a part of Union Executive along with the Vice-President, Prime Minister, Council of Ministers, and Attorney-General of India.

How is President elected?
There is no direct election for the Indian President. An electoral college elects him. The electoral college responsible for President’s elections comprises elected members of:
1. Lok Sabha and Rajya Sabha
2. Legislative Assemblies of the states (Legislative Councils have no role)
3. Legislative Assemblies of the Union Territories of Delhi and Puducherry

Who does not take part in the President’s elections?
The following group of people is not involved in electing the President of India:
1. Nominated Members of Rajya Sabha (12)
2. Nominated Members of State Legislative Assemblies
3. Members of Legislative Councils (Both elected and nominated) in bicameral legislatures
4. Nominated Members of union territories of Delhi and Puducherry

What is the term of the President’s office?
Once President is elected, he holds office for five years. He sits in the office even after the completion of five years given no new election has taken place or no new President has been elected till then. He can also be re-elected and there is no cap on his re-election.


What are the conditions of the President’s office?
There are a few conditions for the candidate running for the President’s elections:
1. President cannot be a member of Lok Sabha and Rajya Sabha. If he has been a member of either of the house, he should vacate the seat on his first day as President in the office
2. President should not hold any office of profit
3. For his residence, Rashtrapati Bhavan is provided to him without the payment of rent
4. Parliament decides his emoluments, allowances and privileges
5. Parliament cannot diminish his emoluments and allowances during his term of office
6. President is given immunity from any criminal proceedings, even in respect of his personal acts
7. Arrest or imprisonment of the President cannot take place. Only civil proceedings can be initiated for his personal acts that too after giving two months’ of prior notice.


What is the procedure for impeachment of a President?
The only condition for the initiation of impeachment of the Indian president is the ‘violation of the constitution.’
Note: Indian Constitution contains no definition of ‘violation of the constitution.’


Can the President’s office be vacant?
Yes, his office can be vacant in the following ways:
1. When the President of India completes his term of five years in the office
2. If the President resigns by putting forward his resignation to the Vice-President of India
3. If Lok Sabha/Rajya Sabha initiates an impeachment charge and they stand valid, he is removed
4. If President dies in the office
5. If the Supreme Court declares his election invalid
Note: Vice-President discharges the duties as President; if the latter’s office falls vacant in the circumstances mentioned above, except by the expiry of the term. As per the President’s Act 1969; if the Vice-President office is vacant too, Chief Justice of India (CJI) (or in his absence); Supreme Court’s senior-most judge, discharge the functions of the President (till new President is elected.)

The powers and functions of the President of India:
Executive Powers of President:
1. For every executive action that the Indian government takes, is to be taken in his name
2. The President may/may not make rules to simplify the transaction of business of the central government
3. The President appoints the attorney general of India and determines his remuneration
4. The President appoints the following people: Comptroller and Auditor General of India (CAG), Chief Election Commissioner and other Election Commissioners, Chairman and members of the Union Public Service Commission, State Governors, Finance Commission of India chairman and members
5. The President seeks administrative information from the Union government
6. The President requires PM to submit, for consideration of the council of ministers, any matter on which a decision has been taken by a minister but, which has not been considered by the council
7. The President appoints National Commissions of: Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes, Other Backward Classes
8. The President appoints inter-state council
9. The President appoints administrators of union territories
10. The President can declare any area as a scheduled area and has powers with respect to the administration of scheduled areas and tribal areas


Legislative Powers of President of India:
1. The President summons or prorogues Parliament and dissolve the Lok Sabha
2. The President summons a joint sitting of Lok Sabha and Rajya Sabha in case of deadlock
3. The President addresses the Indian Parliament at the commencement of the first session after every general election
4. The President appoints speaker, deputy speaker of Lok Sabha, and chairman/deputy chairman of Rajya Sabha when the seats fall vacant
5. The President nominates 12 members of the Rajya Sabha
6. The President can nominate two members to the Lok Sabha from the Anglo-Indian Community
7. The President consults the Election Commission of India on questions of disqualifications of MPs.
8. The President recommends/ permits the introduction of certain types of bills (to read on how a bill is passed in the Indian Parliament, check the linked article.)
9. The President promulgates ordinances
10. The President lays the following reports before the Parliament: Comptroller and Auditor General, Union Public Service Commission, Finance Commission, etc.


Financial Powers of President of India:
1. To introduce the money bill, his prior recommendation is a must
2. The President causes Union Budget to be laid before the Parliament
3. To make a demand for grants, his recommendation is a pre-requisite
4. Contingency Fund of India is under his control
5. The President constitutes the Finance Commission every five years


Judicial Powers of President of India:
1. Appointment of Chief Justice and Supreme Court/High Court Judges are on him
2. The President takes advice from the Supreme Court, however, the advice is not binding on him
3. The President has pardoning power: Under article 72, he has been conferred with power to grant pardon against punishment for an offence against union law, punishment by a martial court, or death sentence.

Pardoning powers of the president includes the following types:
1. Pardon with the grant of pardon convicts both conviction and sentence completely absolved
2. Commutation  with this nature of the punishment of the convict can be changed
3. Remission reduces the term of the imprisonment
4. Respite  awards lesser punishment than original punishment by looking at the special condition of a convict
5. Reprieve stays the execution of the awarded sentence for a temporary period

Diplomatic Powers of President of India:
1. International Treaties and agreements that are approved by the Parliament are negotiated and concluded in his name
2. The President is the representative of India in international forums and affairs

Military Powers of President of India:
The President is the commander of the defence forces of India. He appoints:
1. Chief of the Army
2. Chief of the Navy
3. Chief of the Air Force

Emergency Powers of President of India:
The President deals with three types of emergencies given in the Indian Constitution:
1. National Emergency (Article 352)
2. President’s Rule (Article 356 & 365)
3. Financial Emergency (Article 360)

Ordinance Making Power of the President of India:
Article 123 deals with the ordinance making power of the President. The President has many legislative powers and this power is one of them. He promulgates an ordinance on the recommendation of the union cabinet. 

Veto Power of the President:
When a bill is introduced in the Parliament, Parliament can pass the bill and before the bill becomes an act, it has to be presented to the Indian President for his approval. It is on the President of India to either reject the bill, return the bill or withhold his assent to the bill. The choice of the President over the bill is called his veto power. The Veto Power of the President of India is guided by Article 111 of the Indian Constitution. 

Who are all appointed by the President of India
The chief justice and other judges of the Supreme Court of India and state/union territory high courts. The Comptroller and Auditor General. The Chief Election Commissioner and other Election Commissioners.

What are the legislative powers of the President of India?
Some of the Legislative Powers of the President of India are, he summons or prorogues Parliament and dissolves the Lok Sabha, he summons a joint sitting of Lok Sabha and Rajya Sabha in case of deadlock, he addresses the Indian Parliament at the commencement of the first session after every general election, he nominates 12 members of the Rajya Sabha, he consults the Election Commission of India on questions of disqualifications of MPs, President of India appoints speaker, deputy speaker of Lok Sabha, and chairman/deputy chairman of Rajya Sabha when the seats fall vacant, President of India can nominate 12 members of the Rajya Sabha.

President of India is referred to as the first citizen of India. The Indian President is elected by an electoral college composed of the elected members of the Parliament, Lok Sabha, Rajya Sabha and Vidhan Sabha. There have been 15 personalities who served as Indian Presidents since the adoption of the Indian Constitution in 1950 and there have been tenures when the country was headed by an acting President. 

List of Indian Presidents (1950-2022)
The Constitution of India was adopted on 26th November 1949 (It came into force on 26th January 1950) and Dr Rajendra Prasad was elected as the first constitutional head of the state, the President of India. 

Ram Nath Kovind, the 14th President of India, completed his term in July 2022. Though he was eligible, he did not contest for re-election. As a result, Draupadi Murmu in July 2022, became the 15th Indian President, appointed by the electoral college. 

The 1st President of India was Dr. Rajendra Prasad
He was elected twice as the president
He was also the president of the constituent assembly before being elected for this post.
The tenure of the 1st President of India was 13 May 1952 – 13 May 1957
13 May 1957 – 13 May 1962

The 2nd President of India was Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan
Radhakrishnan was a prominent philosopher and writer.
He also held the position of vice-chancellor of the Andhra University and Banaras Hindu University.
The tenure of the 2nd President of India was 13 May 1962 – 13 May 1967

The 3rd President of India was Zakir Hussain
He was the recipient of Padma Vibhushan and Bharat Ratna.
He was the shortest-serving president and passed away in office.
The tenure of the 3rd President of India was 13 May 1967 – 3 May 1969

The 4th President of India was Varahagiri Venkata Giri
He was elected Vice President of India in 1967.
He served as the president for a short term due to the sudden death of Zakir Hussain in office.
The tenure of the 4th President of India was 3 May 1969 – 20 July 1969
24 August 1969 – 24 August 1974

The 5th President of India was Fakhruddin Ali Ahmed
He was the president during Emergency.
He was the second president who died in office.
The tenure of the 5th President of India was 24 August 1974 – 11 February 1977

The 6th President of India was Neelam Sanjiva Reddy
He was the first Chief Minister of Andhra Pradesh.
He became the youngest President who occupied Rashtrapati Bhavan and contested twice for the post of president.
The tenure of the 6th President of India was 25 July 1977 – 25 July 1982

The 7th President of India was Zail Singh
He was the Chief Minister of Punjab and the Union Home Minister
The tenure of the 7th President of India was 25 July 1982 – 25 July 1987

The 8th President of India was Ramaswamy Venkataraman
He is a receiver of “Tamra Patra” for his contributions to India’s freedom struggle.
The tenure of the 8th President of India was 25 July 1987 – 25 July 1992

The 9th President of India was Shankar Dayal Sharma
He was Chief Minister of Madhya Pradesh and the Indian Minister for Communications.
The tenure of the 9th President of India was 25 July 1992 – 25 July 1997

The 10th President of India was Kocheril Raman Narayanan
He served as India’s ambassador to Thailand, Turkey, China and the United States of America.
The tenure of the 10th President of India was 25 July 1997 – 25 July 2002

The 11th President of India was Avul Pakir Jainulabdeen Abdul Kalam
He played a leading role in the development of India’s ballistic missile and nuclear weapons programs.
He was also a Bharat Ratna recipient.
The tenure of the 11th President of India was 25 July 2002 – 25 July 2007

The 12th President of India was Pratibha Patil
She was the first woman president of India.
The tenure of the 12th President of India was 25 July 2007 – 25 July 2012

The 13th President of India was Pranab Mukherjee
He was awarded the best Parliamentary Award in 1997.
He also received Padma Vibhushan in 2008
The tenure of the 13th President of India was 25 July – 25 July 2017

The 14th President of India was Ram Nath Kovind
He served as the Governor of Bihar.
The tenure of the 14th President of India was 25 July 2017 – 25 July 2022

The 15th President of India is Draupadi Murmu
She has served as the governor of Jharkhand previously.
The tenure of the 15th President of India is 25 July 2022 – Incumbent

Facts about the President of India:
1. Dr. Rajendra Prasad was the longest-serving Indian President. He completed two tenures as the President of the country
2. The shortest-serving President was the third Indian President, Zakir Hussain. He passed away while he was in his office
3. Apart from the full-time Presidents mentioned in the table above, there were three interim Presidents. The three of them were: Varahagiri Venkata Giri, Mohammad Hidayatullah and Basappa Danappa Jatti
4. Neelam Sanjiva Reddy was not just the youngest President of the country but was also the first Chief Minister of Andhra Pradesh
5. Pratibha Patil was the first and the only women President of India
6. If the President of India intents to resign from his post, he/she needs to do it in accordance with the procedure prescribed in Article 61 of the Indian Constitution. The President needs to give a hand-written letter to the Vice President, in case of resignation
7. The President is elected by the members of both the House of Parliament and the elected members of the legislative assembly of States and Union Territories

Vice President of India:
The post of Vice-President of India is modelled on the lines of American Vice-President. In India, Vice-President has the second-highest office in the country. Article 63 of the Indian Constitution mentions the post of Vice-President. Muppavarapu Venkaiah Naidu is the current Vice President of India and the Chairman of the Rajya Sabha. He is in office since 11 August 2017.

How the Vice President is elected in India?
There is no direct election for the Vice-President of India however, he/she is indirectly elected by an Electoral College. The election process is quite similar to that of the President of India but the electoral college that elects President is different from the electoral college responsible for the election of Vice-President of India.
The difference between the electoral college that elects President and the one electing Vice-President of India is given below:
1. In electoral college for Vice President, both elected and nominated members of both the Houses of Parliament take part. In presidential elections, nominated members are not a part of the electoral college.
2. For Vice President’s elections, states have no role to play unlike in President’s elections where state legislative assemblies’ elected members are a part of the electoral college.
Note: The principle of election used in Vice President’s elections is ‘Proportional Representation’ by means of a single transferable vote. (It is similar to that of President’s.)

Who can be a Vice President of India?
An Indian citizen can qualify for the post of Vice President if he is 35 years old or more. Another qualification for a candidate to run for vice-presidential elections is to be qualified to be elected as Rajya Sabha member. Read in detail about the Rajya Sabha on the linked page. An office of profit cannot be held by the Vice President of India. The qualifications of this post are on the same lines of Presidential qualifications.

Who participates in Vice President election?
An electoral college comprising below-given categories of people elect the Vice President. The mode of election hence is termed as ‘indirect election’. The principle of election used is Proportional Representation by means of Single Transferrable Vote.
1. Elected members of both Lok Sabha and Rajya Sabha. To know more about Lok Sabha, visit the given link.
2. Nominated members of both Lok Sabha and Rajya Sabha.

Note:
1. There can be no more than 2 nominated members in Lok Sabha and 12 in Rajya Sabha.
2. State Legislative Assemblies in case of unilateral legislatures and State legislative councils along with Assemblies in case of bilateral legislatures; don’t participate in the election of Vice President

Who is qualified to become Vice President of India?
An Indian Citizen who has completed 35 years of age is qualified to become the Vice-President of India given, he is also qualified to be a Rajya Sabha member. However, he should not be a member of either Lok Sabha or Rajya Sabha and if he is elected as Vice President when he has a seat in either of the house, he is deemed to have vacated that seat on his first day in the office. He also is not allowed to hold any office of profit under union government, state government, public authority and local authority.
Note: The following people are also qualified to become the Vice President of India:
1. Sitting President of India
2. Sitting Vice President of India
3. Governor of State
4. MPs/MLAs

What is the term of office of Vice President?
From the date, the Vice-President  enters his office, Vice President holds the position for five years. However, he can resign before five years by handing over his resignation to the President. The other ways where a vacancy is created in the office of Vice President are given below:
1. When the Vice-President completes his term of five years
2. When the Vice-President resigns
3. When the Vice-President is removed
4. On his death
5. When his election is declared void

Is Vice President also impeached as President of India?
No, unlike President of India who can be impeached formally; there is no formal impeachment for Vice President. Rajya Sabha simply can pass a resolution with a majority and Lok Sabha can pass it. Also, unlike President of India who can be impeached on the ground of ‘Violation of Constitution,’ there is no ground mentioned in the constitution for the removal of Vice President of India.
Note: Supreme Court decides election disputes related to the office of Vice President.

Powers and Functions of Vice President
The functions of Vice-President are two-fold:
1. Vice-President  acts as the ex-officio Chairman of Rajya Sabha. In this capacity, his powers and functions are similar to those of the Speaker of Lok Sabha. In this respect, he resembles the American vice-president, who also acts as the Chairman of the Senate – the Upper House of the American legislature. 
2. Vice-President  acts as President when a vacancy occurs in the office of the President due to his resignation, removal, death or otherwise. He can act as President only for a maximum period of six months, within which a new President has to be elected. Further, when the sitting President is unable to discharge his functions due to absence, illness or any other cause, the Vice-President discharges his functions until the President resumes his office. 
3. The election of a person as Vice-President cannot be challenged on the ground that the electoral college was incomplete (i.e., existence of any vacancy among the members of the electoral college).
4. If the election of a person as Vice-President is declared void by the Supreme Court, acts done by him before the date of such declaration of the Supreme Court are not invalidated (i.e., they continue to remain in force).

While acting as President or discharging the functions of President, the Vice-President does not perform the duties of the office of the chairman of Rajya Sabha. During this period, those duties are performed by the Deputy Chairman of Rajya Sabha. 
Article 63 to Article 71 of the Indian Constitution deals with the election, qualification, and removal of Vice Presidents of India. The table below highlights these Articles in gist.

Article 63: There shall be a Vice President of India
Article 64: The Vice-President shall be ex-officio Chairman of the Council of States and shall not hold any other office of profit
Article 65: The Vice-President to act as President or to discharge his functions during casual vacancies in the office, or during the absence, of President
Article 66: The Vice-President shall be elected by the members of an electoral college consisting of the members of both Houses of Parliament. The Vice-President shall not be a member of either House of Parliament or of a House of the Legislature of any State.
Article 67: The Vice-President shall hold office for a term of five years from the date of his appointment.
Article 68: An election to fill a vacancy created because of the completion of the term of office of Vice-President shall be completed before the expiry of the term. The election to fill a vacancy created because of the death, resignation or removal of Vice-President shall be held as soon as possible.
Article 69: Every Vice-President shall make an Oath or Affirmation on entering upon his office before the President, or some person appointed in that behalf by him
Article 70: Discharge of President’s functions in other contingencies
Article 71: Matters relating to, or connected with, the election of a president or vice-president

Who was the first Vice President of India?
There have been 13 vice presidents since the inception of the post in 1950. The first vice president of India, Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan, took oath at Rashtrapati Bhavan on 13 May 1952. He later served as the president. Following the death of Zakir Hussain in 1969, V. V. Giri resigned from the post of the vice president to contest the presidential election and got elected. Out of 13 vice presidents, six of them later went on to become the president. Krishna Kant has been the only one to die during his tenure. On 11 August 2017, Venkaiah Naidu was sworn in as the 13th vice president of India.

Who is 1 day CM of India?
Jagdambika Pal served as the Chief Minister of Uttar Pradesh for one day (21 February 1998) when Governor of Uttar Pradesh Romesh Bhandari dismissed Kalyan Singh government which was later restored after the court order. Jagdambika Pal is thus the shortest reigning chief minister of any Indian state.

Is the Vice President of India a member of Parliament?
In order to be a President, a person must be qualified for election as a member of the Lok Sabha (House of Peoples), the Vice President must be qualified for election as a member of the Rajya Sabha (Council of States).

Who appoints the President in India?
The President is elected by members of an electoral college consisting of elected members of both Houses of Parliament and Legislative Assemblies of the states in accordance with the system of proportional representation, by means of single transferable vote.

Is Vice-President of India the Chairman of Rajya Sabha?
Yes, Vice President is the ex-officio Chairman of Rajya Sabha.

When can Vice President act as President?
When the President’s office is vacant due to: Resignation, Removal, Death, Absence due to illness

Can Vice President act as himself and as the President simultaneously?
No, when he acts as President, his seat as Vice President is taken over by Deputy Chairperson of Rajya Sabha

What is the maximum period till Vice President serves as President?
The maximum period of six months

What are the major articles related to Vice President in the Indian Constitution?
The articles (63-71) are related to the Vice President. 

Has any amendment made in the constitution in relation to the office of Vice President?
11th Constitutional Amendment changed the way of election of Vice President. Originally, Vice President has to be elected by the two houses that have to assemble in a joint-sitting

Can Vice President be re-elected?
Yes, he/she can be

What is the Vice President’s salary? 
Parliament is entitled to fix Vice President’s salary. The current salary is Rs. 1.25 lakh which he/she draws as a chairperson of Rajya Sabha

Any Vice-President who has served two terms or more than two terms?
Dr S. Radhakrishnan (1952-1962) & Mohammad Hamid Ansari (2007-2017)

The post of Vice-President of India has been taken from which constitution?
The post of Vice President of India is taken from the US Constitution.

Name the Vice-Presidents who were elected unopposed?
Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan, Hidayatullah, Shankar Dayal Sharma served as Vice-Presidents and were elected unopposed.

Which article of the Indian Constitution states that ‘There shall be a Vice-President of India’?
Article 63 of the Indian Constitution states that ‘There shall be a Vice-President of India’.

 How can a Vice-President be removed from the office?
 A Vice-President can be removed from office by the full process of impeachment, or the Rajya Sabha can remove VP by passing a resolution with an absolute majority but the consent of the Lok Sabha is necessary.

What is the tenure of the acting President?
Vice President can work as an acting President for a maximum period of 6 months.

Who was the first Vice-President of India?
Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan served as the first Vice-President of India. His office tenure as the first Vice-President was from May 13th 1952 to May 12th 1962.

Who is the current Vice-President of India?
Jagdeep Dhankhar is the Vice-President of India currently. He took over the office of Vice-President on August 11th, 2022.

What is the qualification for Vice-President of India?
To serve as the Vice-President of India; a citizen should be an Indian national of not be less than 35 years. He should be eligible for election as a member of the Rajya Sabha but shouldn’t be a member of the Rajya Sabha. He also should not hold any office of profit.

What is the salary of Vice-President of India?
Ans. The current salary of the Vice President is Rs. 4 lakh per month (Exclusive of allowances).

The 1st Vice President of India was Dr. Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan (First Vice-President of India)
Educationist and former diplomat. Elected as the first vice president of India on 13 May 1952 following the creation of the position and also became the first ex-officio Chairman of the Rajya Sabha. Re-elected for a second term in 1957 and continued to serve in office until being elected as the President in 1962. 
The tenure of the 1st Vice President of India was 13 May 1952 – 12 May 1957
13 May 1957 – 12 May 1962

The 2nd Vice President of India was Zakir Hussain
Educationist and former governor of Bihar. Elected as the second vice president in the 1962 election defeating N. C. Samantsinhar. First Muslim to be elected as vice president. Received the Bharat Ratna during vice presidency in 1963 and briefly served as Acting President in 1965 during the period of President Radhakrishnan's visit to United Kingdom to perform cataract surgery and during that period, imposed President's rule in Kerala. Relinquished office after being elected President in 1967.
The tenure of the 2nd Vice President of India was 13 May 1962 – 12 May 1967

The 3rd Vice President of India was Varahagiri Venkata Giri
Labour leader, former union minister and former governor. Elected as the third vice president in the 1967 election defeating Mohammad Habib. Became Acting President following the demise of President Zakir Husain on 3 May 1969 and thereupon resigned from the vice presidency. First vice president to not complete full term in office. 
The tenure of the 3rd Vice President of India was 13 May 1967 – 3 May 1969

The 4th Vice President of India was Gopal Swarup Pathak
Former union minister and governor. Elected as the fourth vice president in 1969 to fill the vacancy caused by the resignation of his predecessor Varahagiri Venkata Giri by defeating six other candidates. Retired upon completion of tenure in 1974. First vice president to not get elected as President. 
The tenure of the 4th Vice President of India was 31 August 1969 – 30 August 1974

The 5th Vice President of India was Basappa Danappa Jatti
Former chief minister of Mysore and former governor. Elected as the fifth vice president in 1974 defeating his nearest rival Niral Enem Horo. Became Acting President on 11 February 1977 following the demise of president Fakhruddin Ali Ahmed and served in the acting capacity till the election of Neelam Sanjiva Reddy in July 1977. Retired as vice president upon completion of tenure in 1979. 
The tenure of the 5th Vice President of India was 31 August 1974 – 30 August 1979

The 6th Vice President of India was Mohammad Hidayatullah
Former chief justice of the Supreme Court and former acting president. Elected unopposed as the sixth vice president in 1979 and became the only individual to have served on the top three constitutional positions in the nation, i.e. the President, Vice President and Chief Justice. Briefly acted as Acting President in 1982 during the period of medical absence of President Zail Singh. Retired as vice president upon completion of tenure in 1984. 
The tenure of the 6th Vice President of India was 31 August 1979 – 30 August 1984

The 7th Vice President of India was Ramaswamy Venkataraman
Former union minister. Elected as the seventh vice president in 1984 after defeating B. C. Kamble in the vice presidential election. As vice president, he played important role in being deputed for president on making diplomatic visits and acting as a mediator for then prime minister Rajiv Gandhi and president Zail Singh. Resigned from the vice presidency on the eve of assuming office as the President on 25 July 1987. 
The tenure of the 7th Vice President of India was 31 August 1984 – 24 July 1987

The 8th Vice President of India was Shankar Dayal Sharma
Former union minister. Elected unopposed as the eighth vice president in 1987 to fill the vacancy caused by the election of then vice president Ramasamy Venkataraman as the President. Offered to resign in 1988 after his decision, as ex-officio Chairman of Rajya Sabha, to admit a discussion in the house of the purported extravagance of the then governor of Andhra Pradesh was vociferously objected to by members of the government and several ministers of the council of ministers led the protests against his ruling. In 1991, he was offered the presidentship of Congress Party and later the premiership after the assassination of Rajiv Gandhi, both offers were declined by him. He resigned as the vice president in 1992 after being elected as the President. 
The tenure of the 8th Vice President of India was 3 September 1987 – 24 July 1992

The 9th Vice President of India was Kocheril Raman Narayanan
Former diplomat and former union minister. Elected as the ninth vice president in 1992 defeating his rival candidate Kaka Joginder Singh. First Dalit vice president of India. Resigned from the vice presidency in 1997 after being elected as the President. 
The tenure of the 9th Vice President of India was 21 August 1992 – 24 July 1997

The 10th Vice President of India was Krishan Kant
Former parliamentarian and former governor. Elected as the tenth vice president in 1997 defeating his rival candidate Surjit Singh Barnala of the Shiromani Akali Dal. While serving as vice-president during the 2001 Parliament attack, terrorists used fake labels to gain access to the premises and they crashed into his car. Died in office on 27 July 2002, becoming the first and only vice president to die in office. 
The tenure of the 10th Vice President of India was 21 August 1997 – 27 July 2002

The 11th Vice President of India was Bhairon Singh Shekhawat
Former chief minister of Rajasthan. Elected as the eleventh vice president in 2002 defeating his rival candidate Sushilkumar Shinde of the Indian National Congress. First-ever BJP to be elected as vice president. Nominated as the opposition candidate against Pratibha Patil in the 2007 presidential election in which he was defeated. Resigned from the vice presidency on 21 July 2007 after being defeated in the presidential election. 
The tenure of the 11th Vice President of India was 19 August 2002 – 21 July 2007

The 12th Vice President of India was Mohammad Hamid Ansari
Former diplomat. Elected as the twelfth vice president in 2007 defeating his rival candidates Najma Heptulla of the Bharatiya Janata Party and Rasheed Masood of the Samajwadi Party. Re-elected to office for a second term in 2012 by defeating his rival candidate Jaswant Singh of the Bharatiya Janata Party. First and only vice president since Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan to be re-elected to office and the longest-serving vice president. Retired from office upon completion of tenure on 11 August 2017, becoming the first vice president to serve under three presidents. 
The tenure of the 12th Vice President of India was 11 August 2007 – 11 August 2012
11 August 2012 – 11 August 2017

The 13th Vice President of India was Venkaiah Naidu
Former union minister and parliamentarian. Elected as the thirteenth vice president in 2017 defeating his rival candidate Gopalkrishna Gandhi of the Indian National Congress. First vice president to be born after independence. Made several state visits during tenure as vice president and received the Commander of the Order of the Green Crescent of the Comoros during his visit to the Comoros in 2019. Tenure also marked by the COVID-19 pandemic. Retired from office upon completion of tenure in 2022. 
The tenure of the 13th Vice President of India was 11 August 2017 – 11 August 2022

The 14th Vice President of India was Jagdeep Dhankhar
Former union minister, parliamentarian and governor. Elected as the fourteenth vice president in 2022 defeating his rival candidate Margaret Alva of the Indian National Congress. First vice president to be born after India's becoming a republic in 1950. Currently serving in office. 
The tenure of the 14th Vice President of India was 11 August 2022 – Incumbent

The 1st Prime Minister of India was Jawahar Lal Nehru (1889–1964)
The first prime minister of India and the longest-serving PM of India, the first to die in office. Jawaharlal Nehru became India’s first Prime Minister after independence and served the nation for the next 17 years. He was a prominent figure in the Indian Nationalist Movement. Nehru was a secular humanist, a social democrat, an author, and an anti-colonial nationalist. Under his leadership, the National Congress became the dominating political party and won many elections. Till now his birthday is celebrated as Children’s Day.
The tenure of the 1st Prime Minister of India was 15 August 1947 to 27 May 1964
16 years, 286 days

The 2nd Prime Minister of India was Gulzarilal Nanda (Acting) (1898-1998)
First acting PM of India
The tenure of the 2nd Prime Minister of India was 27 May 1964 to 9 June 1964,
13 days

The 3rd Prime Minister of India was Lal Bahadur Shastri (1904–1966)
Lal Bahadur Shastri was the second prime minister of India who served India from 1964 to 1966. He was the one who promoted White Revolution to boost the production of milk and also created a National Dairy Development Board. In 1965 he also promoted the Green Revolution of India. He was also appointed in numerous prominent positions like Home Minister and Railways Minister. Lal Bahadur Shastri was also posthumously awarded the Bharat Ratna. He has given the slogan of 'Jai Jawan Jai Kisan' during the Indo-Pak war of 1965. 
The tenure of the 3rd Prime Minister of India was 9 June 1964 to 11 January 1966
1 year, 216 days

The 4th Prime Minister of India was Gulzari Lal Nanda  (Acting) (1898-1998)
Gulzarilal Nanda was an Indian economist who focused on labor issues. He was an Interim Prime Minister for two 13 days after the deaths of Jawaharlal Nehru and Lal Bahadur Shastri. In the year of 1997, he was awarded Bharat Ratna.
The tenure of the 4th Prime Minister of India was 11 January 1966 to 24 January 1966
13 days

The 5th Prime Minister of India was Indira Gandhi (1917–1984)
First female Prime Minister of India. Indira Gandhi was one of the major political figures in the Indian National Congress. She was a true politician and became the third prime minister of India. Jawaharlal Nehru’s daughter, Indira Gandhi, was also the first and only female prime minister of India. Her tenure as the Prime Minister, she was from January 1966 to March 1977 and then again from January 1980 to October 1984. She was also the second longest serving prime minister after Jawaharlal Nehru.  The first lady who served as PM for the second term 
The tenure of the 5th Prime Minister of India was 24 January 1966 to 24 March 1977
11 years, 59 days

The 6th Prime Minister of India was Morarji Desai (1896–1995)
Oldest to become PM (81 years old) and first to resign from office. Morarji Ranchhodji Desai was the fourth prime minister of India who served this country between 1977 and 1879. He was also an Indian independence fighter and the leader of Janata Party. He remained in Indian politics for a long time. During this career, he was given a lot of important posts like Home Minister, Finance Minister, Chief Minister of Bombay State, and second Deputy Prime Minister of India.
The tenure of the 6th Prime Minister of India was 24 March 1977 to  28 July 1979  
2 year, 126 days

The 7th Prime Minister of India was Chaudhary Charan Singh (1902–1987)
Only PM who did not face the Parliament. Chaudhary Charan Singh was the fifth prime minister of India and served the nation from 28th July 1979 to 14th January 1980. Frequently he is referred to as the ‘champion of India’s peasants.’ He got motivated by Mohandas Gandhi and entered Indian politics. Chaudhary Charan Singh also became one of the three major leaders of the Congress party between 1952 and 1967.
The tenure of the 7th Prime Minister of India was 28 July 1979 to 14 January 1980
170 days

The 8th Prime Minister of India was Indira Gandhi (1917–1984)
First female Prime Minister of India. Indira Gandhi was one of the major political figures in the Indian National Congress. She was a true politician and became the third prime minister of India. Jawaharlal Nehru’s daughter, Indira Gandhi, was also the first and only female prime minister of India. Her tenure as the Prime Minister, she was from January 1966 to March 1977 and then again from January 1980 to October 1984. She was also the second longest serving prime minister after Jawaharlal Nehru.  The first lady who served as PM for the second term 
The tenure of the 8th Prime Minister of India was 14 January 1980 to 31 October 1984
4 years, 291 days

The 9th Prime Minister of India was Rajiv Gandhi (1944–1991)
Youngest to become PM (40 years old). Rajiv Gandhi was the sixth prime minister of India who served from 1984 to 1989. After his mother, Indira Gandhi, he took the office and became the youngest prime minister at the age of 40. Rajiv Gandhi belonged from the popular and politically powerful Nehru-Gandhi family which was associated with Indian National Congress for years. In his later life he became a member of Lok Sabha and the general secretary of Congress party. After the death of his mother, he became the prime minister. His tenure was full of controversies. Till 1991, he remained the president of Congress. In 1991, he was also awarded Bharat Ratna.
The tenure of the 9th Prime Minister of India was 31 October 1984 to 2 December 1989
5 years, 32 days

The 10th Prime Minister of India was V. P. Singh (1931–2008)
First PM to step down after a vote of no confidence. Prime Ministers of India: From 1989 to 1990, Vishwanath Pratap Singh served India as its 7th Prime Minister. He was also the 41st Raja Bahadur of Manda. Vishwanath Pratap Singh is the only prime minister who belongs to a royal family. In the year of 1969, he joined Indian National Congress and became a member of Uttar Pradesh Legislative Assembly. In 1980, he also became the chief minister of Uttar Pradesh. During Rajiv Gandhi’s ministry, he got different cabinet posts which included Minister of Defense and Minister of Finance. From 1984 to 1987, he became the leader of Rajya Sabha as well. After a lot of controversial events, on 7th November, 1990, Singh resigned from his post of prime minister. His tenure was for 343 days.
The tenure of the 10th Prime Minister of India was 2 December 1989 to 10 November 1990
343 days

The 11th Prime Minister of India was Chandra Shekhar (1927–2007)
He belongs to  Samajwadi Janata Party. Chandra Shekhar Singh was the 8th prime minister of India who served from 10th November 1990 to 21st June 1991. He was the prime minister of a minority government. He is the first prime minister who never held any government office. Critics see his government as a “puppet government” because it had very few party Mps in Lok Sabha. In 1991, the economic crisis of India and the assassination of Rajiv Gandhi made the situation worse.
The tenure of the 11th Prime Minister of India was 10 November 1990 to 21 June 1991
223 days

The 12th Prime Minister of India was P. V. Narasimha Rao (1921–2004)
First PM from South India. Pamulaparthi Venkata Narasimha Rao was an Indian politician and a lawyer who served India as its 19th prime minister. From 1991 to 1996, he was appointed as the prime minister. He was also called as the ‘Father of Indian Economic Reforms”. He was the first South Indian and the second non-Hindu, who became a prime minister of India. Rao brought some important changes in the economy of India which was later followed by Atal Bihari Vajpayee and Manmohan Singh. He also appointed Manmohan Singh as the finance minister to bring a major economic change in India. During this time, Manmohan Singh reformed International Monetary Fund policies which saved India from a major economic collapse. Because of this economic understanding, Rao is also called the Chanakya.
The tenure of the 12th Prime Minister of India was 21 June 1991 to 16 May 1996
4 years, 330 days

The 13th Prime Minister of India was Atal Bihari Vajpayee (1924- 2018)
PM for shortest tenure. Prime Ministers of India: Atal Bihari Vajpayee served India as a prime minister for three times. First, in the year of 1996, he served India for 13 days. Later he was appointed as a prime minister for 13 months in 1998. For the third time, he served India as a full term prime minister from 1999 to 2004. Atal Bihari Vajpayee was also the co-founder of Bharatiya Janata Party. He was the first non-congress prime minister who served India for a full term in office. Apart from being a politician, he was also a writer and a poet.  The first non-congress PM who completed a full term as PM
The tenure of the 13th Prime Minister of India was 16 May 1996 to 1 June 1996
16 days

The 14th Prime Minister of India was H. D. Deve Gowda (born 1933)
He belongs to  Janata Dal. Haradanahalli Doddegowda Deve Gowda is from Karnataka who became the 11th prime minister of India. He served India from 1st June 1996 to 21st April 1997. Before that he became the 14th chief minister of Karnataka and served from 1994 to 1996. At present he is a member of parliament and represents Karnataka in Rajya Sabha. He is also the national president of Janta Dal party.
The tenure of the 14th Prime Minister of India was 1 June 1996 to 21 April 1997
324 days

The 15th Prime Minister of India was Inder Kumar Gujral (1919–2012)
From April 1997 to March 1998, Inder Kumar Gujral served India as its 12th prime minister. He was a politician, diplomat, and a freedom activist. He was imprisoned for taking part in the Quit India Movement. Later in the year of 1964, he joined Indian National congress. Soon he became a member of the Rajya Sabha and the Parliament. In 1996 Inder Kumar Gujral became the Minister of External Affairs and developed Gujral doctrine.
The tenure of the 15th Prime Minister of India was 21 April 1997 to 19 March 1998  
332 days

The 16th Prime Minister of India was Atal Bihari Vajpayee (1924-2018)
PM for shortest tenure. Prime Ministers of India: Atal Bihari Vajpayee served India as a prime minister for three times. First, in the year of 1996, he served India for 13 days. Later he was appointed as a prime minister for 13 months in 1998. For the third time, he served India as a full term prime minister from 1999 to 2004. Atal Bihari Vajpayee was also the co-founder of Bharatiya Janata Party. He was the first non-congress prime minister who served India for a full term in office. Apart from being a politician, he was also a writer and a poet.  The first non-congress PM who completed a full term as PM
The tenure of the 16th Prime Minister of India was 19 March 1998 to 22 May 2004 
6 years, 64 days

The 17th Prime Minister of India was Manmohan Singh (born 1932)
 First Sikh PM. Manmohan Singh is the 13th prime minister of India, serving from 2004 to 2014. He is also an academic, economist, and politician. After Indira Gandhi and Jawaharlal Nehru, he is the longest serving prime minister of India. At present, he is a member of Rajya Sabha, representing Rajasthan. Manmohan Singh is also the first Sikh prime minister of India who was also a part of Indian National Congress. After completing a full five-year term, he was reelected as the prime minister like Jawaharlal Nehru. Manmohan Singh was the governor of RBI and also received Padma Vibhushan award.
The tenure of the 17th Prime Minister of India was 22 May 2004 to 26 May 2014   
10 years, 4 days

The 18th Prime Minister of India was Narendra Modi (born 1950)
4th Prime Minister of India who served two consecutive tenures. Current Prime Minster of India. Shri Narendra Modi was sworn-in as India’s Prime Minister on 26th May 2014, marking the start of his second term in office. The first ever Prime Minister to be born after Independence, Shri Modi has previously served as the Prime Minister of India from 2014 to 2019. He also has the distinction of being the longest serving Chief Minister of Gujarat with his term spanning from October 2001 to May 2014. Inspired by the motto of ‘Sabka Saath, Sabka Vikas, Sabka Vishwas’, Shri Modi has ushered in a paradigm shift in governance that has led to inclusive, development-oriented and corruption-free governance. The Prime Minister has worked with speed and scale to realise the aim of Antyodaya, or ensuring last-mile delivery of schemes and services. First non-congress PM with two consecutive tenures. Current Prime Minster of India.
The tenure of the 18th Prime Minister of India was 26 May 2014 – 2019 and 30 May 2019- Incumbent

Alek's Diary, 
The day 6th May 2023 was very daring. Would never forget this day. But, it also gave me many memories of the adventurous world. It was my first experience to trek a mountain. i was excited, but more than that, I was nervous. Travel vlogs had mentioned that it would be a tiring journey to the top of the mountain. We began our journey right after breakfast. I had taken minimum luggage with me, only the necessray things. But, very soon, I was tired. We had to continue. There was no way down. So, taking breaks, we began our journey, although slowly. soon, we got to see beautiful scenes of the city. Beauty of Mountains just showcased a part of heaven to us. That motivated us to continue the trek. There was no road. We had to go where the mountains took us. A gentle cool breeze took away all the tiredness and filled us with energy. On the way, we met many tourists, also from foreign countries. There were as young as a 7 year child to a 60 year old person. They were trekking, so why couldn't we? With this in mind and body. Everything seemed worthy. All the tiredness just flew away. We had a beautiful scenery of snow capped mountains and a combined view of the 4 cities- Mcleodganj, Dharamkot, Dharmshala and Palampur. We had got a small tent, which had to be shared amoung 3 people! We roamed around the surrounding. Clicking many pictures, breathing in the fresh natural air. In eveningm we experienced the sunset view which was just fantastic. It was dark soon and we went into the tent. The weather was not good. There were thunderstorms and lightenings all around. It was one of the most awaited day of the 8 day tour. 

Dairy, 
the day 16th February 2023 was a memorable one. Everything was normal until afternoon when I returned from school. Just as I reached home at around 2:30 pm and was surfing on mobile, I read a message stating INR 18000 credited to your account. Was shocked for a while, but his was true. The HDFC scholarship for which I had applied, had been credited! Unexpected happiness is quite mesmerizing. Just felt that one. I was filled with joy, excitement and a bit of pride! Only sometime had passed after this event, that i found out that the FIT INDIA QUIZ results were declared. I immediately went to the website NTA and searched for my result. Only a list of selected students was available. I dwonloaded the list and began searching my name in the list. Nervousness was at its peak! Never experienced such feelings ever before. And, I found out that I had been selected for the State round. I was holding 13th rank in complete Maharashtra. Adding to it, I was the only student from the complete Marathwada region. Well Done! Feeling Proud of myself because the quiz had not been an easy one. 60 questions in 30 minutes was quite a tough task, but accomplished. The rest of the day, as it should be, was happily normal. It had been a historic day for me. But the challenges lie ahead. I have to prepare for the state round now. But till then, Good night!

Diary, 
The day 15th August 2023, was special, for me and for the country. The country was celebrating its 77th Independence Day. Normally, I was filled with patriotic feelings. Woke up earlier than usual, and got ready for the day. Went to the bus stop, but found that i had missed the bus. Such a ruckus on such a special day. But, I could not let my mood spoil the day, So, I waited there for the next bus for junior children. The bus came, although after half an hour, and I reached school. As soon as i reached the place, I was given a tie to wear. It was very small for me, but I had to wear it. As it were school orders.
Next, our vice principal sir gave me a blazer to wear, quite amazing, right? Head boy privileges. Next, I along with Sampada, the head girl, took our positions on the ground. Today was our investiture ceremony. Soon, the chief guests arrived and we accompanied them in the welcome processions. Till the last year, I only could see others welcoming the guests, but today, I was a part of it. Next, the flag was hoisted by the chief guest and the national anthem was played. All the struggles of Indian fighters just passed from my eyes. Then, an energetic March Past was done by the children. Then was the time for the investiture Ceremony. The anchor announced -  "Head boy, Alek Redasani". That moment was like a blessing for me. To be the head of the Student's Council, to lead your classmates, is something very special. The moment was just.. I marched towards the guests and stood proudly. The school head, Ms Nila conferred the badge to me and attested it. It wasn't just a badge, it carried with it the responsibilities I would have to confide with. But, it also showcased a very special and precious thing for me. The time passed soon, and the programme now shifted in the admin block of school. We had got a chance to sit with the chief guest, principal and school head. No words to describe that feeling. A very, very proud day. Lifetime memories. People say that good time passes soon, and I literally felt the same. The programme ended soon. Everyone in the school now recognised me. Students of junior grades also now know me. Not everyone gets this. Then, I reached home and the rest of the day, I only listened patriotic songs. Not much study really, since today was a holiday.

Diary,
It was a historical day -  23rd August 2023, for the Indian Space Programmes and this for me too. The long awaited Chandrayaan-3 mission had successfully landed on Moon, making India the only country in entire world to land on the south pole of our natural satellite. The day went normally till the evening. Just as I reached home from schoo, I had meal and then I gathered the material for study. As I mentioned yesterday, I had completed my Maths syllabus and now I am looking forward for practicing papers. So, today was the first paper. I took the printouts of the Question Paper, and began the exam dot at 3 pm. The questions were descent ones, as they are always for me, especially in subject like Maths. The MCQs took too long since I had to solve all the questions, unlike other subjects, where only facts are required and no calculations. The other questions were also good, I solved them all, but fell short of time. I had to complete the paper in 3 hours. By the time I finished the time limit, the last question (38th) was remaining. I took extra time, and solved it too. Although, it was just for practice! By that time, I had already started the TV and the live telecast of Soft landing was broadcasting on DD National. And there it was, India was finally on the moon. I was fluttering in the air. The way ISRO learnt from the Chandrayaan 2 mission is just amazing. The complete country is proud of its excellent scientists. I have got more inspiration to serve the nation in the fields of Space Technology. Every news channel was showing the same content. After all, it was a very difficult task that India has accomplished. Everybody had shared their feelings on social media, be it Whatsapp statuses or Instagram reels. The rest of the day went in the same pride.
